---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__CKWSTV20080916/"
title: "__CKWSTV20080916"

---

##Ship Wrecks
September 16, 2008

<div class="column2">

LONG LOST SHIPWRECKS FROM THE WAR OF 1812 HAVE BEEN DISCOVERED IN THE WATERS OFF KINGSTON.

A COMPANY CALLED "DEEP QUEST 2 EXPEDITIONS" HAS DISCOVERED FOUR, 200 YEAR OLD BRITISH WARSHIPS, AND THEY'VE GOT THE VIDEO TO PROVE IT.

AS NEWSWATCH'S CHRIS HARVEY EXPLAINS, THESE WARSHIPS WERE BUILT IN KINGSTON ON THE POINT OF LAND WHERE THE ROYAL MILITARY COLLEGE NOW STANDS.

BITE: THIS IS THE RESTING PLACE FOR THE HMS MONTREAL, FORMERLY KNOWN AS THE WOLFE.

BITE: THE 110 FOOT LONG WARSHIP CARRIED A CREW OF 220 WITH 23 CANONS, AND WAS THE GREAT LAKES FLAGSHIP OF BRITISH NAVAL COMMANDER COMMODORE JAMES LUCAS YEO DURING THE WAR OF 1812.

THE MONTREAL WAS DISCOVERED BY KENN FEIGELMAN AND DEEP/QUEST 2 EXPEDITIONS, WHOSE MANDATE WAS TO DOCUMENT KNOWN SHIPWRECKS BETWEEN KINGSTON AND PRINCE EDWARD COUNTY.

FEIGELMAN SAYS HE GOT A TIP ABOUT THE REMAINS OF A SHIP NEAR KINGSTON AND WENT OUT AT NIGHT USING THE SIDE-SCANNING SONAR ON THEIR SHIP.

KENN FEIGELMAN

"AND WE REALLY THOUGHT WE HAD FOUND THIS VESSEL.

WELL IT APPEARS IN HIND SIGHT WE HAD FOUND ONE OF THE SISTER SHIP OF THE HMS MONTREAL."

TWO DAYS LATER THEY DID FIND THE MONTREAL.

AND THEN TWO WEEKS AFTER THAT, THEY MADE ANOTHER AMAZING DISCOVERY.

KENN FEIGELMAN

"WE FOUND TWO MORE VESSELS ON SIDE SCAN SONAR. AND THEY BOTH APPEAR TO BE BRITISH WARSHIPS, SCUTTLED BY THE BRITS AT THE END OF THE WAR OF 1812."

FEIGELMAN SAYS THE SHIPS WERE SUNK BECAUSE THEY WEREN'T NEEDED ANY MORE, BUT ALSO SO THEY COULDN'T FALL INTO THE HANDS OF THE U.S. NAVY.

THEIR DISCOVERY OPENS ANOTHER DOOR INTO KINGSTON'S PAST.

ANNE BLAKE:

"THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THAT IS THAT IT REALLY SPEAKS TO KINGSTON'S LONG HERITAGE AS AN IMPORTANT NAVAL CENTRE ON THE GREAT LAKES BACK TO 1812."

THESE SHIPS WERE BUILT IN KINGSTON ON POINT FREDERICK WHERE RMC NOW STANDS.

AND BECAUSE OF WAR WITH THE AMERICANS, THE BRITISH BUILT THEM QUICKLY.

KENN FEIGELMAN

"AND IN SOME CASES THEY WERE BUILT OF GREEN WOOD. SO WOOD THAT WASN'T AGED PROPERLY. SO YOU COULD IMAGING BUILDING SOMETHING OF UN-AGED GREEN WOOD.

THE VESSEL'S LIFE SPAN IS REALLY DIMINISHED COMPARED TO SOMETHING BUILT OF AGED OAK OR WHAT EVER."

FEIGELMAN IS PUTTING TOGETHER A VIDEO AND PHOTOS OF THE FOUR WARSHIPS FOR THE PUBLIC TO VIEW.

BUT HE SAYS THEY MUST BE PROTECTED FROM SCAVENGERS

KENN FEIGELMAN: "WE DON'T WANT PEOPLE GOING DOWN AND YANKING OUT SOUVENIR SPIKES OR BOARDS TO MAKE COFFEE TABLES WHATEVER, THIS WOULD BE A TRAVESTY.

THESE ARE VERY IMPORTANT TIME CAPSULES IN THE HISTORY OF NORTH AMERICA, OF KINGSTON, OF CANADA OF COURSE.

THEREFORE WE'VE BEEN VERY SECRETIVE ABOUT THEIR ACTUAL LOCATION AS FAR AS HOW FAR OFF KINGSTON, DEPTHS AND GPS COORDINATES AND HOW FAR OFF KINGSTON FOR VARIOUS REASONS AND OBVIOUS REASONS.

WE DON'T WANT PEOPLE STRIPPING THEM."

ANNE BLAKE: "BECAUSE ANY EVIDENCE THAT'S REMOVED FROM THOSE VESSELS TAKES AWAY ANY POSSIBILITY OF PROVIDING THE KIND OF RESEARCH THAT WILL HELP US DEFINITIVELY SAY,YES, THIS IS THE WOLFE, OR YES THIS IS WHATEVER VESSEL IT MAY BE."

ALL THE INFORMATION GATHERED WILL GO TO THE MARINE ARCHAEOLOGY DIVISION OF PARKS CANADA WHICH WILL ULTIMATELY BE RESPONSIBLE FOR THE SHIPWRECKS.

FEIGELMAN SAYS THERE ARE 450 SHIPWRECKS IN THE EASTERN LAKE ONTARIO REGION. AND ONLY 80 HAVE BEEN FOUND. THAT LEAVES A LOT OF HISTORY TO UNCOVER.

CHRIS HARVEY CKWS NEWSWATCH, KINGSTON.
</div>
