---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__CKWS20081002/"
title: "__CKWS20081002"

---

##Spill Follow
October 2, 2008
A DIESEL FUEL SPILL ON WOLFE ISLAND HAS LEFT RESIDENTS IN THE DAWSON POINT AREA DRINKING BOTTLED WATER.

FUEL OIL WAS BEING TRANSFERRED BETWEEN TANKS BY THE CREW OF A TUG BOAT YESTERDAY, WHEN MORE THAN A THOUSAND LITRES SPILLED INTO THE LAKE.

THE TUG IS USED TO FERRY EQUIPMENT AND WIND TURBINE PARTS TO THE ISLAND.

BUT AS NEWSWATCH'S CHRIS HARVEY REPORTS, THERE SHOULD BE NO LASTING ENVIRONMENTAL DAMAGE FROM THE DIESEL SPILL.

THESE TUG BOATS, OWNED BY NADRO MARINE SERVICES ARE USED TO PUSH BARGES LOADED WITH SUPPLIES AND PARTS FOR THE HUGE WIND TURBINE PROJECT ON WOLFE ISLAND.

CANADIAN HYDRO, THE COMPANY BUILDING THE TURBINES, IS USING THE WOLFE ISLANDER'S WINTER DOCK FOR DELIVERIES.

BUT ON WEDNESDAY MORNING, SOMETHING WENT WRONG DURING FUELLING.

HUNDREDS OF LITRES OF DIESEL FUEL WAS SPILLED INTO LAKE ONTARIO.

MIKE JABLONICKY:

"AS SOON AS WE DISCOVERED THE SPILL OUR SPILL RESPONSE WENT INTO EFFECT THROUGH NADRO MARINE.

SPILL RESPONSE CREWS ARE ON SITE, THE COAST GUARD WAS CALLED, ALL THE MINISTRIES WERE CALLED IMMEDIATELY AS PART OF OUR PROTOCOLS."

JANET TWINING:

"FROM WHAT I UNDERSTAND THE VOLUME SPILLED WAS APPROXIMATELY 15 HUNDRED LITRES.

THE POLLUTER HAS ACTIVATED THEIR RESPONSE PLAN.

SO THEY'VE HIRED A CONTRACTOR TO CONDUCT THE RESPONSE OPERATIONS.

THE COAST GUARD IS HERE AS A FEDERAL MONITORING OFFICER TO MAKE SURE THAT WHAT'S HAPPENING IS APPROPRIATE."

NADRO STAFF PUT DOWN 100 FEET OF BOOM AROUND THE "SEA HOUND" TO TRY AND CONTAIN THE SPILL.

THE COAST GUARD DEPLOYED ANOTHER 800 FEET OF CONTAINMENT BOOM.

A FIRM HIRED TO DO THE CLEANUP THEN TOOK OVER.

MIKE JABLONICKY:

"THEY USE OIL ABSORBENT RAGS, OIL ABSORBENT BOOMS, AND BASICALLY THEY SUCK IT OUT THAT WAY FROM THE TOP OF THE WATER."

RESIDENTS WERE NOTIFIED OF THE SPILL AND WERE TOLD NOT TO DRINK THEIR WATER UNTIL MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT SAYS IT'S OK.

MANY RESIDENTS DRAW THEIR WATER FROM THE LAKE.

THEY'LL BE SUPPLIED WITH BOTTLED WATER UNTIL THE CLEAN UP IS COMPLETED.

CHRIS HARVEY:

"IF YOU'RE LOOKING FOR THE POSITIVE SIDE IN THIS OIL SPILL IT WOULD BE THIS...

SINCE IT HAPPENED, THE WIND HAS BEEN BLOWING ON SHORE AND HAS ESSENTIALLY CAPTURED THE OIL IN ONE BAY, SO IT'S EASY TO GET AT."

DALE GRATION:

"FROM WHAT WE'VE SEEN SO FAR THERE HAVEN'T BEEN SIGNIFICANT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS.

THERE IS SOME PRODUCT ON THE SHORE LINES THAT WE'RE GOING TO MAKE SURE GETS CLEANED UP.

BUT AS FAR AS ENVIRONMENT IMPACTS THERE'S NOTHING TOO SERIOUS AT THIS POINT."

AN INVESTIGATION IS UNDERWAY TO DETERMINE HOW THE SPILL HAPPENED AND TO MAKE SURE IT DOESN'T HAPPEN AGAIN.

CHRIS HARVEY, CKWS NEWSWATCH, WOLFE ISLAND

IT'S EXPECTED THE CLEAN UP CREWS WILL BE DONE THEIR WORK BY TOMORROW AFTERNOON.

