---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__CKWS-TV20071030/"
title: "__CKWS-TV20071030"

---

##Marine Talks
Oct, 30 2007 - 7:50 PM

A DEADLINE IS FAST APPROACHING, AND THE FUTURE OF KINGSTON'S "MARINE MUSEUM" HANGS IN THE BALANCE.
AT THE END OF NOVEMBER, THE CITY'S LONG-TERM LEASE WITH THE FEDS FOR THE MUSEUM AND DRY DOCK LAND EXPIRES.

THE CITY WANTS TO BUY THE PROPERTY, BUT CAN'T AFFORD THE EXPENSIVE SHORELINE REPAIRS.
NEWSWATCH'S CHRIS HARVEY HAS AN UPDATE.

A CROWNING MOMENT FOR THE MARINE MUSEUM CAME DURING THE SUMMER.  THE FORMER COAST GUARD SHIP ALEXANDER HENRY WAS PULLED INTO THE SHELTER OF THE DRYDOCK -- NEXT TO THE MARINE MUSEUM.

THE OPEN WATER MOORING AREA WAS IN SUCH POOR CONDITION THE SHIP WAS IN DANGER OF BREAKING LOOSE AND DRIFTING AWAY. BUT THE INSIDE WALLS OF THE DRY DOCK ARE ALSO CRUMBLING.

MARK SIEMONS:

"THIS PROPERTY PUBLIC WORKS ABANDONED AND THEY'VE LET IT CRUMBLE INTO DISREPAIR. IT'S UNFAIR TO EXPECT THE CITY TO PAY THE MILLIONS OF DOLLARS TO RESTORE IT."

THAT'S THE CRUX OF LAND OWNERSHIP TALKS BETWEEN THE CITY THE FEDS. THE COST COULD BE AS MUCH AS 15 MILLION DOLLARS.

THE CITY WANTS TO BUY THE WATERFRONT PROPERTY FOR A DOLLAR, BUT THERE'S BEEN NO WORD WHETHER OTTAWA WILL FLOAT SOME MONEY TO HELP COVER THE BADLY NEEDED REPAIRS.

CHRIS HARVEY:
"IN THE MID 1800'S KINGSTON WAS ONE OF THE MOST IMPORTANT NAVAL AND COMMERCIAL PORTS IN THE ENTIRE GREAT LAKES. IT WAS SO IMPORTANT THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT BUILD A DRY DOCK HERE IN 1890. AND SIR JOHN A MACDONALD HIMSELF LAID THE FIRST STONE IN JUNE OF THAT YEAR."

THE ENTIRE PROPERTY HAS BEEN DESIGNATED A NATIONAL HISTORIC SITE. BUT THE CITY'S LEASE WITH PUBLIC WORKS CANADA EXPIRES IN A MONTH. SO THE MUSEUM COULD BE LEFT HIGH AND DRY.

MARK SIEMONS:
"THIS ISN'T SOMETHING THAT YOU'RE GOING TO SELL AND PUT A CONDO ON.  IT NEEDS TO BE PRESERVED FOR CANADA AND THAT'S NOT WHAT THEY'RE DOING."

CITY OFFICIALS HAVE BEEN TRYING FOR MORE THAN 8 YEARS TO WORK OUT A DEAL TO BUY THE PROPERTY. BUT COMMISSIONER CYNTHIA BEACH SAYS WITH NOVEMBER'S DEADLINE FAST APPROACHING THE CITY AND THE MUSEUM ARE STILL IN LIMBO.

CYNTHIA BEACH:
" WE JUST SIMPLY DON'T HAVE AN ANSWER AT THIS POINT."

BEACH SAYS KINGSTON HAS PUT UP HALF A MILLION DOLLARS TO STUDY HOW MUCH REPAIR WORK HAS TO BE DONE, AND TO PROVIDE PERMANENT MOORINGS FOR THE ALEXANDER HENRY.  SHE AGREES THE MARINE MUSEUM IS CAUGHT IN THE MIDDLE.

CYNTHIA BEACH:
"THEY'RE IN AN AWFUL BIND RIGHT NOW THAT THEY CAN'T SECURE SOME OF THEIR OPERATING FUNDING IF THEY DON'T HAVE A LEASE OR SOME LONG TERM ABILITY TO SHOW THAT THEY'RE GOING TO BE IN THAT LOCATION."

KINGSTON'S POSITION IS THIS.... IF PUBLIC WORKS PAYS FOR WATERFRONT AND DRYDOCK REPAIRS, THE CITY WILL LOOK AFTER THE SITE FROM THEN ON. BUT TIME IS RUNNING OUT.. .AS THE MUSEUM MOVES INTO UNCHARTED WATERS.

CHRIS HARVEY, CKWS NEWSWATCH, KINGSTON.


