---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__CKWS-TV2011-05-21/"
title: "__CKWS-TV2011-05-21"

---

LIFEJACKET RECORD: Round the world, thousands of people donned their personal floatation devices - or P-F-D's - to set a new record.

May 21, 2011

Source: http://www.ckwstv.com/index.cfm?page=news&id=4829

AROUND THE WORLD, THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE DONNED THEIR PERSONAL FLOATATION DEVICES - OR P-F-D'S - TO SET A NEW RECORD.

STEENBAKKER: "THESE INFLATABLE JACKETS ARE THE LATEST JACKETS THAT'S OUT THERE IN THE MARKET, AND WHAT MOST PEOPLE ARE GETTING BECAUSE THEY'RE QUITE COMFORTABLE.

BUT, A LOT OF PEOPLE HAVE NEVER ACTUALLY LOOKED INSIDE, OR HAD AN OCCASION TO USE ONE, SO THIS GIVES PEOPLE AND OPPORTUNITY TO SEE WHAT HAPPENS WHEN THEIR LIFE JACKET INFLATES, TO SEE IF IT'LL ACTUALLY INFLATE PROPERLY.

LAST YEAR, WE FOUND OUT THAT THERE WAS SOMEBODY WHO HAD A GREAT BIG TEAR INSIDE OF THEIR LIFEJACKET, AND THAT WOULD'VE BEEN A CATASTROPHIC SITUATION.

"THE ONE THING THAT'S SO IMPORTANT TO REALIZE IS THAT WHILE THESE ARE INFLATABLE LIFE JACKETS, THERE IS THE OCCASION THAT IT MAY NOT GO OFF. AND YOU'VE GOT TO KNOW EXACTLY WHAT TO DO THEN. AND THAT'S TO OPEN IT UP, AND THERE'S YOUR WHISTLE, TO OPEN IT UP AN FIND YOUR INFLATOR, AND START INFLATING MANUALLY."

THIS WAS THE SCENE AT COLLINS BAY MARINA IN KINGSTON'S WEST END AS A NUMBER OF PEOPLE THERE TOOK PART IN THE CHALLENGE.

THE GOAL IS TO EDUCATE THE PUBLIC ABOUT BOATING AND LIFE JACKET SAFETY.

89 PER CENT OF RECREATIONAL BOATERS WHO DROWN EACH YEAR IN CANADA AREN'T WEARING THE LIFE-SAVING DEVICES.

A SIMILAR EVENT ALSO TOOK PLACE IN QUINTE WEST AT THE C-F-B TRENTON YACHT CLUB.

BOTH FEATURED THE NEW STYLE INFLATABLE LIFE JACKETS.

