---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__CKWS-TV20070510/"
title: "__CKWS-TV20070510"

---

<strong>Oh Henry!</strong>
May, 07 2007 - 8:10 PM

THE PRIZED POSSESSION OF THE KINGSTON "MARINE MUSEUM" IS IN A RACE AGAINST TIME.
THE ALEXANDER HENRY IS TIED TO A DOCK THAT'S FALLING APART.
THE MUSEUM HAS A PLAN TO MOVE THE SHIP TO A SAFER BERTH.
BUT AS NEWSWATCH'S STU HAY REPORTS, THAT PLAN IS CURRENTLY MIRED IN RED TAPE.
THE RETIRED COAST GUARD SHIP --ALEXANDER HENRY -- IS HARD TO MISS.
IT'S BEEN A FIXTURE ON THE KINGSTON'S WATERFRONT FOR NEARLY 2 DECADES.
THE RETIRED SHIP IS THE PRIZED POSSESSION OF THE MARINE MUSEUM OF THE GREAT LAKES.
BUT NOW, THERE'S AN URGENCY TO MOVE IT.... TO SAFER WATERS.
THE MAIN REASON -- THE PIER ITS NOW MOORED TO IS CRUMBLING.

MARK
SOMETIMES YOU WAKE UP IN THE MIDDLE OF THE NIGHT HAVING DREAMS ABOUT READING ABOUT THE SHIP FLOATING DOWN THE WATER WAY."

THE ALEXANDER HENRY WON'T HAVE TOO FAR TO GO.... TO GET A SECURE BERTH THAT'S PROTECTED FROM THE WIND AND WAVES.
VOLUNTEERS JUST WANT TO PULL IT AHEAD ABOUT 70 METRES INTO THE HISTORIC DRY DOCK.... WHERE IT CAN CONTINUE TO SERVE AS A BED AND BREAKFAST DURING THE TOURIST SEASON.
BUT THERE IS PLENTY OF RED TAPE FLOATING AROUND THE PLAN.
THE DRY DOCK IS OWNED BY THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT -- AND THEY'LL HAVE TO GET ON BOARD BEFORE THE MOVE CAN TAKE PLACE.

CYNTHIA
"WE HAVE ASKED THEM TO RESPOND TO THAT.
WE ALSO THINK THERE IS SOME STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS THAT NEEDS TO PLACE ON THE DRY DOCK.
AS WELL AS SOME PERMITS THAT WOULD NEED TO BE IN PLACE BEFORE IT ACTUALLY GOT MOVED IN."

BAD NEWS FOR THE DOZENS OF MARINE MUSEUM VOLUNTEERS READY TO MAKE THE MOVE IN THE NEXT FEW WEEKS..
IT HAS TO BE DONE WHILE WATER LEVELS ARE HIGH, SO THE SHIP CAN CLEAR THE DRY DOCK ENTRANCE

MARK
"THERE IS ONLY ONE TIME OF THE YEAR THAT WE CAN MOVE IT IN AND THAT'S DURING HIGH WATER.
IT WON'T MAKE IT IN OTHERWISE.
SO THERE STRUGGLING TO GET IT IN AS SOON AS POSSIBLE BECAUSE THE WATER IS HIGH RIGHT NOW.

THE MARINE MUSEUM HAS ENOUGH MONEY TO MAKE THE SHORT MOVE -- WHICH ESSENTIALLY MEANS PULLING THE SHIP INTO THE DRY DOCK.
BUT THEY'LL HAVE TO GET OTTAWA PULLING IN THE SAME DIRECTION... WITH THE NECESSARY PERMITS.
STU HAY CKWS NEWSWATCH KINGSTON. THE CITY IS ALSO NEGOTIATING WITH OTTAWA TO GET A LONG-TERM LEASE FOR THE WATERFRONT SITE... SO THE MARINE MUSEUM AND ITS SHIP DON'T HAVE TO RELOCATE.
THE CURRENT LEASE EXPIRES THIS FALL.


