---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__CKWS-TV20070606/"
title: "__CKWS-TV20070606"

---

<strong>Wind Turbines</strong>
Jun, 06 2007 - 7:30 PM

A MASSIVE PLAN TO INSTALL WIND TURBINES ON WOLFE ISLAND IS GENERATING PLENTY OF TALK TODAY -- NOT ALL OF IT POSITIVE.
A NEW ENVIRONMENTAL STUDY CONCLUDES THE 410-MILLION DOLLAR PROJECT WILL HAVE A "MINIMAL IMPACT" ON THE ISLAND'S WAY OF LIFE.
BUT MANY RESIDENTS ARE PUTTING THEIR OWN SPIN ON THE FINDINGS.... AND ENVIRONMENT CANADA IS QUESTIONING THE RESULTS AS WELL.
THE STORY FROM NEWSWATCH'S LUCY LOPEZ.    THE VIEW OF WOLFE ISLAND IS BREATHTAKING.
AND IT MAY BE CHANGING.... WITH THE PROPOSED ADDITION OF 86 GIANT WIND TURBINES LIKE THESE ONE'S.... ENOUGH TO POWER 75-THOUSAND HOMES.
A GREEN ENERGY PROJECT THAT'S GENERATING PLENTY OF CONTROVERSY.
THE TURBINE PLAN HAS DIVIDED THE COMMUNITY.... TURNING NEIGHBOURS INTO ENEMIES.

JANET WHITE:
"WE'VE LET THE WILL OF A COMPANY DIVIDE US. IT'S NOT OUR WILL IT'S THEIR WILL. THEY'RE JUMPING THROUGH LOOPHOLES IN THE LAW AND THEY'RE HURTING US. THEY'RE HURTING OUR FAMILIES."

BUT CANADIAN HYDRO HAS BEEN APPLAUDED BY THE PROVINCE FOR ITS 410-MILLION DOLLAR PLAN... THAT WILL HELP THE GOVERNMENT PHASE OUT COAL FIRED GENERATORS.
THE RELEASE OF THIS ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STUDY, DONE BY DEVELOPER, SHOWS THE TURBINES ---- EACH ONE STANDING 125 METRES HIGH -- WILL HAVE A MINIMAL IMPACT ON MIGRATING BIRDS, PROPERTY VALUES AND NOISE LEVELS.
AND A POSITIVE IMPACT ON THE ISLAND'S ECONOMY.

" IF U HAD FEWER THAN 86 WIN TURBINES YOU WOULDN'T HAVE AN ECONOMICALLY VIABLE WIN PLANT.
AND THERE ARE ECONOMIC BENEFITS TO THE WIND PLANT BEING ON THE ISLAND. TEN LOCAL JOBS....WE'RE EXPECTING UP TO TEN FULL TIME JOBS ON THE ISLAND."

THE ISLAND COUNCIL ENDORSES THE PROJECT AS WELL... IT STAND TO COLLECT AN EXTRA MILLION DOLLARS IN TAXES AND OTHER FEES.
AND EACH RESIDENT CAN POCKETABOUT 7-THOUSAND DOLLARS TO HAVE A TURBINE ON THEIR LAND.
BUT MANY ISLANDERS AREN'T SOLD ON THE ECONIOMIC BENEFITS...OR THE GREEN SPIN.

JANET WHITE:
"THE HYDRAULIC FLUID IN THE BLADE SPITS NON-STOP AND THIS WILL BE FOR 80 YEARS. WE'RE GOING TO INHERIT A HUGE BROWN ZONE. THE ISLAND WILL BECOME NOTHING BUT A BROWN ZONE. THIS IS 80 YEARS. THIS IS MY GENERATION, MY CHILDREN'S GENERATION AND THEIR CHILDREN. THIS IS A TRAVESTY AND WE HAVE TO STOP IT."

SARAH MCDERMOTT IS CONCERNED ABOUT LITTLE SANDY BAY--A PROVINCIALLY RECOGNIZED WETLAND, WHERE MIGRATORY AND ENDANGERED BIRDS FLOCK TO YEAR ROUND.


SARA MCDERMOTT:
"THERE'S A 2 KM ESTUARY THAT RUNS INLAND HERE AND THE COMPANY IS PROPOSING TO HAVE IT SURROUNDED BY AT LEAST 25 TURBINES."

EVEN ENVIRONMENT CANADA IS QUESTIONING THE STUDY FINDINGS.
CKWS HAS OBTAINED A LETTER FROM THE AGENCY ABOUT THE IMPACT OF TURBINES ON WETLANDS.
IT SAYS "THE WOLFE ISLAND WIND FARM RANKS AS A CATEGORY 4 PROJECT, WHICH IS THE HIGHEST LEVEL OF CONCERN POSSIBLE."

A PIE IN THE SKY PROPOSAL, ACCORDING TO JANET WHITE.

JANET SB:
"RIGHT THERE IN THE SKY. IT WILL FLICKER ON US EVERYDAY FOR THE REST OF OUR LIVES."

BUT IT'S NOT JUST WOLFE ISLAND'S DEBATE ... RESIDENTS SAY THERE MAY BE PLANS TO ADD HUNDREDS OF ADDITIONAL WIND TURBINES ON AMHERST ISLAND AND CAPE VINCENT, NEW YORK.
LUCY LOPEZ, CKWS NEWSWATCH, WOLFE ISLAND  RESIDENTS WILL HAVE A MONTH TO MAKE COMMENTS ON THE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STUDY.
BUT THERE'S ALREADY TALK OF FILING AN APPEAL TO THE ONTARIO MUNICIPAL BOARD.



