---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__EMC20090226/"
title: "__EMC20090226"

---

## Report recommends $18M lifeline for city's aging marinas Posted Feb 26, 2009
BY BILL HUTCHINS


Kingston's two municipal marinas can get $18 million in upgrades without impacting taxpayers, according to a new report.

The $40,000 consultant's study, presented this week to the city's arts, recreation and community policies committee, says the massive capital upgrades to Portsmouth Olympic Harbour and Confederation Basin can be offset by higher revenues that may take up to 25 years to recoup.

"The $18 million isn't to be a tax burden whatsoever. It's to be revenue generated for years to come," said Ed Leeman, supervisor of municipal facilities.

The study looked at how to modernize both city-run marinas to make them more attractive to the estimated 8,000 seasonal and transient boaters who dock there every season. It concluded they need "substantial investment in facility upgrading to realize their full potential as icons of Kingston's tourism economy."

Councillor Rob Hutchison, who sits on the committee asked to endorse the report, says he has no problem supporting the upgrades as long as the money isn't siphoned from other projects such as the revitalization of Lake Ontario Park and the Kingston Memorial Centre.

"The money really hinges on whether it's a break even operation," he said.

According to the marina sustainability report, jointly prepared by the Tourism Company and TSH Associates, the dockside and on-shore improvements can generate between $700,000 and $1.5 million annually to pay back the investment through increased boat traffic. But it says the operating surpluses could take between 13 to 25 years to be realized.

Currently, the marinas rely on annual tax subsidies of $320,000 to stay afloat.

A few years ago, the city talked about privatizing the marinas to save money but later abandoned that approach and opted for a long-term strategy to make them financially self sufficient.

The study says the aging marinas need extensive upgrades to meet the demands of the boating community.

At Confederation Basin, the needed improvements include $4 million to reconfigure the docks and allow direct public access to the Shoal Tower, which is currently restricted for boat security reasons, $3.8 million to install an extra 100 slips near Block D, $1.3 million for an administrative services building and $500,000 for on-shore facilities for boaters, plus extra money for on-site parking, pump out and refueling services.

At Portsmouth Olympic Harbour, $5.1 million is recommended to upgrade and expand the existing dock space, plus $1.5 million to improve site access and landscaping.

"The whole boating trend has changed in the past 30 years with increased power demands, longer boats and wider berths," said Leeman.

The marinas, as noted in the report, are in prime waterfront locations that make them attractive to boaters, regattas and other special events such as the annual Poker Boat run. Yet boaters have complained the facilities lack adequate electrical connections, showers, garbage disposal, parking, security and room to accommodate larger sail and power boats.

A complicating factor in the city's drive to spruce up the municipal marinas is that the water and shoreline areas are owned by the federal government. The city, in turn, leases the property. Land transfer talks are still ongoing and are considered key to kick-starting the improvements.

Leeman says even though many residents won't benefit from the marina millions, the facilities remain anchors of the tourism industry. It's estimated recreational boating generates millions of dollars for the local economy as seasonal and overnight boaters stop to shop and dine.

If the committee endorses the report's business plan, and council does the same, staff will begin the planning and design phase.

Leeman says the capital costs can be set aside in stages without impacting other municipal priorities, and the work could begin as early as 2010.

Source: http://www.emckingston.ca/20090226/News/Report+recommends+$18M+lifeline+for+city's+aging+marinas
