---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__EMC20120913/"
title: "__EMC20120913"

---

##Elevator Bay project stalled, city demands $803,000 in unpaid taxes
By Bill Hutchins


<div class="column2">

EMC News - The Elevator Bay waterfront site that was once touted for a massive $160 million condominium and marina project is in danger of being sold by the city for unpaid property taxes.

Elevator Bay Development Inc. accumulated $803,000 in tax arrears over the past five years for its undeveloped pier at 1102-1110 King Street West, according to city officials.

However, councillors are willing to give the owner one more chance to pay up. They've agreed to hold off on a tax sale of the property until May 30, 2013.

"What confidence do we have that we will receive the proposed payments?" asked Coun. Jim Neill.

City treasurer Desiree Kennedy says a certified cheque for $150,000 has already been received. Another payment of $100,000 is due December 20, and then the outstanding balance must be paid by next May, under the terms agreed by council September 4.

Any default of the payment schedule means the tax sale process will resume. The Municipal Act allows the city to seize and sell properties that go into tax arrears.

The Forrest Group of Toronto once proposed building three condominium towers on the abandoned dock that juts into Lake Ontario, site of Kingston's last grain elevator. A marina was also envisioned. The plans were unveiled to the public in early 2007.

"It was a very impressive project," recalled Coun. Neill.

But the ambitious Admirals Walk project never made it off paper, despite rezoning approvals.

According to planning documents filed with the city, the 5.8 hectare property would be allowed up to 343 condo units and 38 townhouses. A site plan application has remained in abeyance with the planning committee for five years. A sales office at the entrance to the pier remains abandoned.

As the years passed, the unpaid taxes amassed to the point where the city issued a tax arrears certificate in September 2011. The certificate signals a one year countdown that would eventually allow the city to sell the property in a bid to recoup its lost taxes. The pier's value is believed to be worth more than $2 million.

The new payment extension gives the property owner more time to make good on tax arrears, but councillors wondered if the already-approved residential zoning can be rescinded if the back taxes aren't collected.

City solicitor Hal Linscott says while it may be difficult to de-zone a property, any future zoning approvals could be tied to timely tax payments. "If, in fact, further approvals are required we could do that."

Councillors also wondered if the ambitious project will ever proceed.

"What's the potential for us seeing development on this site?" asked Coun. Neill.

Staff could not provide an answer on the development potential.
</div>
