---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__EMC20081211/"
title: "__EMC20081211"

---

## Still a duet at the Tett? Questions over fate of city, Queen's cultural cluster Posted Dec 11, 2008
BY BILL HUTCHINS

Mayor Harvey Rosen says the city is prepared to move ahead on its own to redevelop its half of the J.K. Tett Centre on King Street West.

"Our patience has limits," he told reporters.

The mayor was reacting to speculation in the community that Queen's University may revise its share of the cultural cluster project. It's not clear if the university intends to scale back the size or delay the timing of the project due to economic concerns.

"They may be having challenges with the project, and some of it could be related to the political turmoil in Ottawa," Rosen remarked.

Queen's bought two waterfront buildings and some land within the Tett complex from the city two years ago, and unveiled plans in the summer of 2007 to construct a $40 million performing arts centre. Construction was supposed to start this fall.

The university also wanted to partner with the city to do most of the construction and renovation work at the same time. University officials say planning for the cultural centre is still moving ahead, but would not comment on the financing structure or the timing of the construction work.

The city-owned J.K. Tett building is slated to under $6 million in renovations to coincide with the Queen's work. Many tenants in the Tett centre have since relocated.

Source: http://www.emckingston.ca/20081211/News/Still+a+duet+at+the+Tett%3F+Questions+over+fate+of+city,+Queen's+cultural+cluster
