---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__EMC20110414/"
title: "__EMC20110414"

---


##Waterfront pathway dock is locked-up over safety concerns
By Bill Hutchins



EMC News - A popular waterfront destination for swimming, fishing, picnics and watching sunsets is now off-limits to pedestrians and motorists.

A chain link fence has been placed around the large dock beside the old psychiatric hospital. The former commercial dock has been used as part of the city's waterfront pathway system for 30 years. The dock is beside the pathway that meanders between Lake Ontario Park and the sprawling grounds of Providence Care.

"People are very upset," said Coun. Liz Schell, whose Portsmouth district includes the waterfront trail.

The provincial government owns the hospital grounds, but the deep water dock is administered and controlled by Transport Canada. In a March 7 letter to the city, a senior ranking Transport Canada official says the dock is crumbling and had to be closed for safety reasons.

"During the summer of 2010 Transport Canada conducted a safety inspection of the dock and found that the structure has deteriorated significantly and that it now poses a risk to the safety of the general public," wrote Gail Crossman, Transport Canada's manager of port operations, divestiture and property programs.

Crossman says they have no choice but to restrict access to the dock by erecting a safety fence and install warning signs.

She added: "The inspection showed that portions of the supporting steel structure has rusted away in several areas around the dock's edge and that the dock surface now shows signs of unusual settlement."

The dock was once a hub of commercial activity. It's where coal was unloaded to provide heat for the older portion of the psychiatric hospital complex. However, in recent decades, it's been widely used by the public as a recreation and leisure area.

"During the summer there's always lots of kids and families having picnics and swimming off the dock," said one man out for a stroll by the dock.

Closing the level dock means pathway users are now forced to go up and down a steep cement hill to get around the fencing. Coun. Schell says some seniors and those in manual wheelchairs are now, effectively, restricted from using the pathway itself.

"They may as well turn around and go home. I think that's really unfortunate," said the councillor, who noted her own mother won't be able to climb the steep bypass around the dock.

Coun. Schell has a motion scheduled for the April 19 council meeting asking Transport Canada to reopen a flat portion at the back of the dock to help people with limited mobility.

Transport Canada already considered leaving an unfenced section of the dock for trail users, but decided against it, Schell explained.

In Crossman's letter, it was noted: "Since the area under restriction is outside the current pathway system we feel that this decision may have a slight impact on the public however we emphasize that this decision was made strictly on the matter of safety."

Some trail users said they understand the safety issues but want to know whether Transport Canada plans to fix up and reopen the dock.

The only indication Crossman gave in her letter is that: "At this time no decision on the status of the dock itself has been made."

The city has been in talks with Transport Canada for years about acquiring federal waterfront properties such as the LaSalle Causeway, Confederation Basin and Portsmouth Olympic Harbour marinas and the Marine Museum's dry dock. The municipality leases the marina space under long term leases with the federal government. However, the old coal dock has not been part of the talks.

Transport Canada's deep water dock, one of the few left in Kingston, has been also discussed as a possible long-term location for the Wolfe Island ferry to handle future capacity needs, and for cruise ships.



Original source: http://emckingston.com/20110414/news/Waterfront+pathway+dock+is+locked-up+over+safety+concerns
