---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__EMC20090528/"
title: "__EMC20090528"

---

## Richardson Beach improvements get swept away by council Posted May 28, 2009
BY BILL HUTCHINS

Swimmers hoping to have Richardson Beach restored to a safe swimming spot will have to cool their heels while another beach study is done.

After a year long analysis, city parks and recreation staff concluded that a proposal to install pea gravel and two curved stone piers extending 18 metres from the shoreline of the Richardson Bath House is not worth the $300,000 financial investment. The study says the proposed beach enhancements would create poor water quality between the protective pier and extensive environmental and archaeological assessments would be needed.

Instead, council agreed with an alternate staff recommendation to explore the possibility of creating a sandy beach in nearby Breakwater Park across from Kingston General Hospital. The new location will be studied for a suitable beach design, parking, safety features and change room amenities.

Local residents held a mass swim last summer to support the restoration of Richardson Beach and the historic 1919 Bath House. The shoreline has jagged stones that are covered in a green slime that make it very slippery. The rocky shore is one reason why most swimmers stay away.

Politicians agree that Kingston, known for its sparkling waterfront and 150 kilometres of shoreline, needs a beach playground close to the downtown.

Source: http://www.emckingston.ca/20090528/News/Richardson+Beach+improvements+get+swept+away+by+council
