---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__EMC20090716/"
title: "__EMC20090716"

---

## Uneasy councillors get first look at proposed redesign of Lake Ontario Park Posted Jul 16, 2009
BY BILL HUTCHINS

The long-awaited vision to revamp Lake Ontario Park has been presented to city council.

It features an enhanced beachfront, new pathways and boardwalk, events pavillion, water park and winter skating pond.

But several politicians are uneasy about many of the new design features that will cost about $4.3 million to construct.

"I think it's too much. It's too expensive. I'm hearing from citizens to keep it simple," said Coun. Rob Matheson.

A landscape architectural firm spent nearly a year collecting public ideas to come up with a concept plan that would add a host of new amenities to the scenic west end park such as improved walking trails and picnic spots, fishing, canoe rentals, expanded swimming, waterside amphitheatre, children's splash pad and picnic areas. Work on the so-called Master Plan actually started with a public consultation and a visioning exercise three years ago before consultants were brought in to pull the ideas together.

And, they produced big plans for the big park.

"I don't think it's overkill. We need to be promoting activities for families," said Coun. Mark Gerretsen, whose district includes Lake Ontario Park.

He supports the need for improvements and adds they are considerably cheaper than the $30 million that's estimated to spruce up the Memorial Centre grounds.

While councillors support elements of the concept plan - with its meandering pathways, new place space and improved shoreline - they still have many questions about child safety around a large stormwater/skating pond, potential removal of mature trees, accessibility for disabled and the planned demolition of four existing buildings in favour of building two new ones.

"The intent of the Master Plan is not to level the park," assured urban designer Paul Carabott with the firm Peter J. Smith and Company.

He says the proposed redesign will promote open space activities, protect the park's natural beauty and preserve many of the current community uses such as picnics, festivals and dog shows.

"There's actually more useable open space under this plan than what you have now," he told the July 14 council meeting, which ran late into the evening and had to resume the following day before the plan could be voted on.

The redesign does not include an off-leash dog park or a return to seasonal camping. Consultants say the dog park, which council already decided to remove, is not in keeping with attempts to create a premiere park while RVs and campers would take up 50 percent of the open space.

Coun. Vicki Schmolka said she will push to send the Master Plan to a committee for a more detailed study and public input to ensure it's what residents really want.

"I think most people don't understand what's being proposed here and they need to weigh in on it. For instance, the idea of demolishing every building on the site because it's more expensive to retrofit them."

Residents also voiced concerns over the potential loss of a community garden and the inclusion of a parking lot in Elevator Bay Park. However, city staff say those will not happen. They also vowed to keep as much of the park open during the phased construction and not to cut down mature trees.

"Our intent is to keep every healthy tree on that site. But I can't guarantee that is 100 percent attainable," said Carabott.

He says the longhouse and other buildings, though structurally sound, are not adaptable to the new uses proposed for the park and should be removed in favour of a new central pavillion and a lakeside bathhouse.

Concerns were also voiced about child safety around a two to six feet deep stormwater pond that's meant to serve as a winter skating rink.

"Will it need a chain link fence?" wondered Coun. Bill Glover.

Staff don't think the pond, near the front entrance, will need to be fenced in for safety or insurance reasons.

"I don't think it is a big issue. There are other parks were ponds do exist and they're not fenced," said Lanie Hurdle, the city's director of recreation and leisure.

A total of $4.5 million has been set aside by council to finance the multi-year construction which could start with site preparation work as early as this fall unless the concept plan is sent to a committee for more study.

Hurdle says the concept plan provides a general overview of the changes but the detailed design plan - which irons out specific issues of what goes where - still needs to be finalized.

Source: http://www.emckingston.ca/20090716/News/Uneasy+councillors+get+first+look+at+proposed+redesign+of+Lake+Ontario+Park
