---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__EMC20100211/"
title: "__EMC20100211"

---

##City's proposed carbon tax on Poker boats is 'discrimination'
By Bill Hutchins

<div class="column2">

Why is the city only picking on the big guys?

That's a question burning through Poker boat owners in Kingston following council's recent decision to seek 'carbon offsets' for pollution that's generated by the muscle machines.

Kingston's Bob Ackley, who owns one of the speed boats and enters the 1000 Islands Poker Run, wonders why the city doesn't apply its new sustainability fee to the hundreds of pleasure boaters or commercial sightseeing boats that dot the harbour.

"Why aren't they attacking the tour boats about excess diesel fumes and emissions? Poker boats bring three to five million bucks to the city in three days. It's an economic boost that we don't have here."

Fellow Poker boat owner Mark Braithwaite has another word for council's so-called carbon tax: "Discrimination."

"There's thousands of other boats in Kingston and they're picking on one type of boat."

Braithwaite disputes claims that the speed boats, which can burn through $550 in gas during the Kingston to Prescott Poker Run, are large pollution generators.

"Because these boats have powerful engines they're more fuel efficient. A smaller boat going from Kingston to Prescott would burn twice as much fuel."

The million dollar boats can reach speeds of 140 kilometres an hour.

Braithwaite doesn't think the city's so-called carbon tax will sink the Poker Run, though he says it could prompt the event to move down the river.

"They'll go to Gananoque," he predicts. "Gananoque will take them back and they (the town) will get the revenue."

The event used to be based in Gananoque until an apparent dock dispute brought the boats to Kingston a few years ago.

While it's unclear what form of carbon offsets the city will attempt to secure from Poker Run organizers, a recent study by the city's environmental watchdog group, KEAF, suggests a compensation fee of $10,000money that could be used to plant new trees or refit municipal buildings with solar panels.

Coun. Rob Hutchison says he spearheaded the 'clear the air' motion, approved 11-1 by council, in order to bolster Kingston's claim to being the most sustainable city in Canada.

"Now that it's come before us we can't just push it aside or we'll end up with hypocritical egg on our faces," he told council.

But it appears other municipal events and activities may not be subjected to a similar carbon tax, at least not now.

An attempt to evaluate other well-known local events from a sustainability perspectivefrom the Snowbirds air show to the Santa paradestalled at council. Supporters failed to get enough votes to develop a carbon tax policy, the second motion on the Poker Boat issue. It lost on a 6-6 tie vote at the Feb. 2 council meeting.

Coun. Lisa Osanic says it's "overkill" to have a policy on all events and activities, noting Kingston is a tourist town.

However, other parts of Coun. Ed Smith's fact-finding motion were approved including a KEDCO report on the economic impact of the Poker Run in March, plus a public meeting and internet survey in April to gauge reaction to the event's social and cultural impact.

Coun. Smith says all four pillars of sustainability - economic, environment, social, culture - must be reviewed when deciding the Poker Run's impact.

"We need to get a sense of how important this event is to the public," he said.

The city will also study this summer's downtown Poker Run to see how many visitors it attracts, how long they stay and how much money they spend.

KEDOC, however, cautioned it has no budget to undertake a comprehensive study on the Poker Run's economic impact. A KEDCO spokesperson told council it could cost about $20,000.

</div>

