---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__EMC20100128/"
title: "__EMC20100128"

---

##City wants to clear the air when hosting Poker Run eventJan 28, 2010
By Bill Hutchins

<div class="column2">

EMC News - Organizers of the annual 1000 Islands Poker Run should have to pay for the privilege of polluting the environment, say local politicians.

In a first of its kind decision, city councillors will negotiate with Poker Run stakeholders for "carbon offsets" that would compensate the city for air pollution caused by the muscle boats.

Coun. Rob Hutchison spearheaded the motion, which was approved 11-1 by council, aimed at bolstering Kingston's push to become the most sustainable city in Canada.

"Now that it's come before us we can't just push it aside or we'll end up with hypocritical egg on our faces," he told the January 19 council meeting.

Hutchison insisted the city is not picking on the Poker Run, but must react to a recent study that found the annual August weekend event generates 100 to 200 tonnes of carbon dioxide emissions, almost equal to a round-trip 757 plane trip from Toronto to Vancouver.

"It's the Poker Run because of misfortune," he said of the city's recent environmental interest in the event, adding: "We're not talking cancellation (of the Poker Run) whatsoever."

The city does not have a policy to monitor the carbon footprint generated by the dozens of local and tourism-related events it hosts every year, such as the exhaust fumes from a Snowbirds aerial performance. But that could change over time.

The Poker Run is the first event that council has singled out for environmental responsibility. Though some are uneasy about it.

Doug Ritchie, managing director of the Downtown Kingston Business Improvement Area, says the big boat organizers could simply relocate to another host community along the St. Lawrence River to avoid Kingston's environmental scrutiny.

"Having an additional charge related to carbon emissions would be putting us at a great disadvantage compared to other locations," he said.

It's unclear what form of carbon offsets the city will attempt to secure from Poker Run organizers, though a recent study suggests a $10,000 compensation feemoney that could be used to plant new trees or refit municipal buildings with solar panels.

Coun. Vicki Schmolka supports the idea of creating a 'carbon offset reserve fund'fueled by cash from the Poker Run and other pollution generating eventsfor the city to use at its discretion.

"That's what I'm leaning towards. We have a lot of older buildings owned by the city that could benefit from improvements that are funded through a carbon offset policy."

Coun. Ed Smith, the only one present to vote against the Poker Run compensation plan, says the city can't ignore the other pillars of sustainability that the event supports. Namely, it pumps money into local tourism.

"This motion is premature. We need reports on the cultural, economic and social pillars so we have the full picture," said Smith, who has his own motion that will likely be debated at the next meeting on February 2.

It calls on KEDCO to report on the economic impact of the Poker Run, plus holding a public meeting and internet survey to gauge community views about the cultural and social impacts. The complete report, including options to create a new policy on how all events and city activities could be evaluated from a sustainability perspective, would be presented to council in May. Several councillors indicate they will endorse Coun. Smith's wide-ranging motion, but they still want to pursue carbon offsets with the Poker Run between now and June.

"We need to do something," said Coun. Leonore Foster, adding the city should negotiate "well and kindly" with poker boat organizers.

Organized by Poker Runs America, the unique event involves high performance boats going down the river from Kingston to Prescott to pick up a playing card at five checkpoints. The boat with the best poker hand wins.

Some websites estimate over 50,000 spectators come to visit the 150 speedboats during the three day competition in Kingston. This year's event is slated for August 6-8.

</div>
