---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__EMC20091001/"
title: "__EMC20091001"

---

## What's old is new again ... for inner city industrial area Posted Oct 1, 2009
BY BILL HUTCHINS

Land clean-up grants, public consultation, new pathways and a new name.

Those are among the strategies to revitalize Kingston's Old Industrial Area and spur new development on the inner city lands.

Council has approved a $100,000 funding envelope to implement the strategies.

The Old Industrial Area covers a wide swath of mostly derelict, Brownfields property bounded roughly by Railway/Cataraqui Streets, Division Street, Elliot Avenue and Montreal Street. City officials estimate there are 40 to 50 acres of vacant, privately-owned land that can be enhanced for new development.

Rather than begin a municipal land assembly - a costly and time consuming process to buy up land from private owners - the city is instead planning extensive infrastructure improvements to roads, transit, pathways and trails to make the area more attractive for future growth. Right now, the area is a collection of bland industrial buildings, long abandoned or demolished warehouses and some vacant land that's often considered polluted and unattractive.

City officials want to rejuvenate the under-used industrial area and turn it into 'employment lands' once again. It's a tricky process because most of the land is privately owned and the city itself can not easily force zoning changes or redevelopment.

"The fact that the city does not own the vacant lands in the area presents a dilemma in so far as the ability to amend the zoning in the area," according to staff.

To that end, staff will implement a series of new strategies, including:

-public consultation with area residents and business owners on types of future uses they'd like to see

-municipal grants that promote Brownfield clean-up, sustainable development and green infrastructure

-extend the K&P pathway through the area

investigate neighbourhood friendly policies that could encourage services such as grocery stores and pharmacies

-marketing and rebranding plan to remove the 'old industrial' stigma that's attached to the area

Another proposal to complete the Wellington Street extension from Railway Street to John Counter Boulevard was shelved by council. Many councillors remain hesitant to extend any portion of Wellington Street due to the cost and neighbourhood traffic disruptions.

With city-owned industrial land in short supply, officials began taking a closer look at ways to spruce up the Old Industrial Area to make it more attractive for businesses to locate or relocate. But it lacks many of the amenities enjoyed by other high profile 'business parks,' namely, there is no landmark entry point, establishment of arterial roads is incomplete, Brownfields exist, and newly developed properties sit next to deserted lands.

The name itself - Old Industrial Park - is a marketing problem.

Potential new names include 'Kingston Heritage Industrial,' 'Harbour and Rail Industrial Area,' or 'River and Rail Industrial Area.'

Half of the $100,000 implementation money will be spent to hire a professional marketing firm to do public consultation, land use inventory and rebranding. The rest of the money will be used to explore Brownfield sgrants from senior governments.

The western border of the Old Industrial Area is undergoing a rejuvenation on city-owned land. In addition to the opening of the police station two years ago, construction of the Children's Aid Society office began this summer and a multi-million dollar modernization of the public works yard is planned.

Source: http://www.emckingston.ca/20091001/News/What's+old+is+new+again+...+for+inner+city+industrial+area
