---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__EMC20081113/"
title: "__EMC20081113"

---

## Cruise ship industry wants to make Kingston a port-of-call Posted Nov 13, 2008
BY BILL HUTCHINS


Kingston could play a much more significant role in welcoming cruise ships that are plying the Great Lakes next summer, according to the cruise line industry.

The Great Lakes Cruising Coalition, comprised of 25 Canadian and American ports, describes Kingston as a "port in waiting" for passenger ships that are big enough to have the cruise liner feeling, yet small enough to fit through the 1950's era St. Lawrence Seaway.

But is Kingston able the accommodate this form of floating tourism?

Most of the deep water docks are either already taken, or in poor shape. But city politicians say they'll find the room for the one-day berthing requirements.

"It has tremendous potential for economic development, for tourism, and everyone involved in that," said Coun. Bill Glover.

The city is prepared to make the Crawford Wharf available when the first of the so-called pocket cruise ships come calling in 2009.

"We're looking at about four visits per year," explained growth commissioner Cynthia Beach.

Crawford Wharf, at the foot of Brock Street, is already a busy launching point for several outbound day cruises. But it rarely welcomes large groups of incoming passengers.

Beach says there is enough room on the dock to handle cruise ships on a temporary basis until long term mooring arrangements can be found.

Coincidentally, council is currently discussing whether to spend as much as $7 million to restore the deep sea dock near the Marine Museum. The federal government owns the crumbling and fenced off West Street dock, and is in talks to sell it to the city.

A new ship, the six-deck Pearl Mist, is due to make her maiden eight-day St. Lawrence Seaway and Thousands Islands cruise in late June, carrying as many as 210 passengers. Scheduled ports of call include Quebec City, Trois Rivieres, Montreal, Clayton, New York, Kingston and Toronto, according to the Pearl Seas Cruises website.

"It would be very disappointing if Kingston were unable to accommodate Pearl Mist on her maiden voyage, and miss the opportunity to impress their owners that Kingston can provide their customers with a world class experience," said Stephen Burnett of the cruise line coalition.

City officials say the Crawford Wharf has sufficient room to accommodate her 335 feet length.

The passengers will be doing more than just strolling within a few blocks of the ship. They're expected to hop on tour buses for local sightseeing excursions.

"Cruise ship passengers typically don't want to be dumped ashore and told to come back in three hours," said deputy mayor Mark Gerretsen, who fully supports the new tourism initiative.

It will be up to the cruise line to supply the buses and on-shore excursions, but they're asking the city to provide tour bus space and on-shore facilities like washrooms. Those facilities already exist on or near the Crawford Wharf.

The Pearl Mist, recently constructed in Halifax, is roughly three times the length of the Canadian Navy's Kingston class coastal patrol ship. It's touted as the "new style of luxury small ship cruising" because it can travel faster and offer more intimate surroundings than the monster liners cruising the Atlantic. It features suites with private balconies and amenities like a spa, fitness centre, lounges and Internet service, and regional dishes to reflect each cruise destination. The cost to hop aboard for the maiden eight-day voyage from Quebec City to Toronto ranges from $3,955 to $5,795 per person.

In addition to voyages through the St. Lawrence Seaway and the Great Lakes, the Pearl Mist will offer trips to Atlantic Canada, the Caribbean and New England. According to its itinerary, the ship is scheduled to stop in Kingston once in June and July and twice in October of next year, and again in 2010.

Coun. Glover says it's a floating vault for the city's tourism industry. "Think of the ship as a great big safe full of money."

"It doesn't matter where the passengers are coming from. They're coming here to spend money."

