---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__KTW20080815/"
title: "__KTW20080815"

---

##The Black Angus sails againBy Rob Mooy



If you spot red sails in Kingston harbour this summer, you will be witnessing a small piece of Great Lakes waterway history.

The Marine Museum of the Great Lakes will be the eventual home for the Black Angus, affectionately known as the “Mowat Boat,” previously owned by Angus Mowat, father of author Farley Mowat.

The Black Angus was a common sight in the Bay of Quinte in the 1970s. The 28-ft. wood double-ended clinker fishing boat was built in the west end of Prince Edward County in the early 1900s. She served for many decades in that capacity until laid up, and then was discovered by the late Angus Mowat. He, like a number of owners before him, adapted the boat for pleasure sailing.

The boat was donated to the Marine Museum by the Mowat family following his death.

It sat in storage until a dedicated team of volunteers, under the direction of Peter Cobbett, took on the task of rebuilding and restoring the boat.

The task turned out to be an immense one.

“For almost 100 years the Black Angus was used only for fishing until Angus Mowat, with his love of the water, bought it and transformed it for his purposes,” says Maurice Smith, nautical historian.

“This project is important not only for its restoration, but also to sail it and learn more about its history and operation.”

At first glance, the Black Angus looked in quite good shape. However, on closer inspection the group found several boards split and rotting, broken ribs, delaminated decking and parts of the cuddy cabin and the centreboard trunk.

“Since it was the museum’s intention to have her sailing again, 75 - 80 per cent of the boards were replaced and many ribs repaired or replaced,” says Cobbett. The decking was replaced including the superstructure and the centreboard trunk.

“We have been working on Black Angus just over five years, accumulating over 7,000 hours volunteer work.”

The crew got great satisfaction developing the necessary skills to restore a craft of this nature.

“We were enormously elated to see a boat of such beautiful lines restored to seaworthiness,” adds Cobbett.

“The lines of this boat made a big impression on Angus Mowat, when, as a young man of 17, he saw her being built by Scott Hutcheson in 1908 at Barcova, Ont.”

After a bit more maintenance, the Black Angus will be the waterways for sea trials by her crew.

The group hopes the vessel will eventually be moored in a slip behind the museum and a small wooden boat display area be built in a landscaped park setting.

“It is the intention of the Marine Museum to sail her for a few weeks each year as a visible PR icon and to have her on static display outside the museum before winter storage,” Cobbett says.


