---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__KTW20090521/"
title: "__KTW20090521"

---

##Feds, province ante up for performing arts centre
By KTW Staff



Ground will soon be broke on construction for a $63 million performing arts centre on the King Street West waterfront property known as the J.K. Tett Centre.

Federal, provincial and municipal leaders made a monetary commitment last week for the centre that will provide an acoustically superior, medium sized concert hall, as well as a studio theatre, an art gallery and a film screening room for local and visiting arts enthusiasts.

The Governments of Canada and Ontario are each setting aside one-half of eligible costs of the project, up to a maximum contribution of $15 million. Generous benefactors of Queen’s University, Drs. Alfred and Isabel Bader, have given $18 million to the Centre. The City of Kingston has also confirmed a funding contribution of $6 million. Additional fundraising will be undertaken by the university.

The total estimated cost of the performing arts centre is $63 million.

John Baird, Canada’s Transport and Infrastructure Minister, and the Honourable George Smitherman, Deputy Premier of Ontario and Minister of Energy, made the announcement that Queen’s University will soon break ground on a new performing arts centre thanks to a joint investment by the Governments of Canada and Ontario.

“Under the leadership of Prime Minister Stephen Harper, the Government of Canada is investing in cultural infrastructure initiatives that develop and promote Canada’s rich multicultural heritage,” said Baird.

“A new Performing Arts Centre at Queen’s University is a welcomed venue to showcase artistic and cultural activities in Kingston and the region,” he said.

”Investing in cultural infrastructure is a great way to create jobs, build stronger communities and forge the creative workforce of tomorrow,” said John Gerretsen, Ontario’s Minister of the Environment and MPP for Kingston and The Islands. “Queen’s University is one of the economic anchors of Kingston and the government of Ontario, under the leadership of Premier Dalton McGuinty, is pleased to be investing with our university and my city in this exciting project.”

Queen’s Principal Tom Williams said the performing arts centre will be an important and iconic addition to the already vibrant cultural centre that is Kingston.

“We are proud to be able to provide an environment where artists of the Kingston and Queen’s communities and beyond can develop and showcase their creative talents,” said Williams.

“Without these significant investments from the Governments of Canada and Ontario, the City of Kingston, and from Queen’s benefactors Drs. Alfred and Isabel Bader, the Isabel Bader Centre for the Performing Arts would not be possible.”

The new centre will be unique to the region and will help meet the cultural needs of Queen’s University, the City of Kingston and south eastern Ontario. The Centre will provide an acoustically superior, medium sized concert hall, as well as a studio theatre, an art gallery and a film screening room for local and visiting arts enthusiasts to enjoy for years to come.

The Centre will provide the following benefits for residents, students and visitors to the region:

<ul>
<li>A 560-seat concert/recital hall;
<li>A 150-seat studio theatre;
<li>A climate controlled art gallery housed in the lobby, which will be accessible to the public; and
<li>A film screening room.
</ul>

Federal and provincial financial support for this project is conditional on the project meeting all applicable eligibility and approval requirements under the Government of Canada’s infrastructure plan and on the signing of a contribution agreement.



Article ID# 1577498

