---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__KTW20090702/"
title: "__KTW20090702"

---

##Paving paradise, to put up a ‘fake’ park
By Linda Morgan



I attended the lengthy Lake Ontario Master Plan meeting on June 23, with about 60 people. The designer described the three-year process of building the new park, including shutting it down in the fall of 2009, prepping the site and then constructing first the water area and then the back area. Reopening, I think, would be 2012.

Concern was expressed by many that the park would be completely closed for that long. The concern was politely dismissed.

I need to make it clear — I am a tree-hugger, a conservationist. There were many of us at the presentation as well as birders walkers, photographers and, yes, dog park people, as well as residents of nearby highrises and representatives of groups who use the park, such as CORK Chair Tim Irvine, who was concerned about camping spaces for his regatta (for tents and RVs) and the Agility Connection group, who put on about four competitions a year drawing from across North America and creating about $80,000+ in revenue for local business with each competition.

They have plans into 2010 which could be adversely affected by the park development. They indicated that two years without the park would kill their organization.

The designer indicated that some of the current trees would have to go, even the good ones, to create “vistas”. The fact that they need to close the park entirely for up to two or years and the first step was to remove the current asphalt, buildings, trees, play ground equipment, hydro and water is concerning.

Does it seem strange to anyone else —construction for two years in a park to “create nature”?

The park, as conceived under the guidelines given to the designers by the city, is not what people requested in the public meetings or in the surveys. In the meetings, interest was indicated in a people/family park (including pets), healthy trees, picnicking areas, renewed parking, functional washrooms, and places to sit and read or contemplate nature in quiet. Not learning centres, we already have that in the presentations at CRCA and along the Rideau Trail.

The public wanted play areas, sand pits. Nor did they request a man-made pond-filled with storm sewer runoff, which will certainly require pumping and recirculation in order to keep in from becoming a stagnant cesspool.

The surveys also indicated dog parks were a highly requested item. Although a decision has been handed down by council about this, there is still a large group of park users who come to LOP to run their dogs in the current off-leash area. They are a vibrant community and through much of the year the sole users of the park. They need to be heard.

There was discussion of camping space; a tenting area has been allocated as a joint use in one of the open areas but RV spots will be limited to five; for many events the proximity of RV site draws people. The presenter suggested the site would need to be much larger to meet the need.

We are not talking about woodland sites with 20 feet between RVs. We had a usable and functional camping area in the park. We need to re-open it.

The designer’s plans were just that —design. They created fake “natural spaces” where real ones already exist, though in need of maintenance and upgrade. They offer educational programs when none have been requested.

We are being handed a very costly bill of goods — projected $4.3 million — which in recent experience in municipal construction (LVEC) lead to 30% over rides and in the end did not deliver the planned benefits.

We need to say a resounding no to the plan and back off to simpler models. Plant new trees; repair roads; clean up the washrooms; collect garbage regularly.

LOP is a gem. People talked about the serenity and peace that exists there (with the dog park) and they value that. Have we really gotten to the point of paving paradise and putting up ...”a fake park”.

The bottom line, there was enough negative opinion expressed that the matter should not come to council for approval but should go back to A.R.C. committee for review and hopefully emerge with a more cost effective park which will represent what the people want. If it does come to council, it should be defeated before a lovely park is destroyed and replaced by an expensive concept no one really wants

Attending were Councillors Mark Gerretson,Rob Hutchison, Rob Matheson, and Vicki Schmolka. I am certain some will reflect accurately what occurred and hopefully their concerns about how to go forward.

Linda Morgan
Kingston



Article ID# 1640758
