---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__KTW20080808/"
title: "__KTW20080808"

---


##Poker Run brings thousands of fans
By Tori Stafford

<p>If you’re downtown this weekend at all, there’s no way you can miss it — 100-plus boats ranging from 30-60 feet in length coming together for the annual 1000 Islands Poker Run.

Last year’s event brought thousands to Kingston’s shorelines to watch in awe as these gigantic boats, decked out in fancy paint and a ton of horse power, took off from Confederation Basin in the world’s largest poker run.

A poker run isn’t your average race. In fact, it isn’t a race at all. It is a tour, in this case through the 1000 Islands, with five checkpoints along the way. At each checkpoint, crew members are given an envelope containing one playing card. At the end of the run, the crew with the best poker hand wins, making a poker run a game of chance, luck and fun on the water.

But with boats stretching up to 60 feet, these boats aren’t weak on power.

“There’s one that has even four jet-assisted helicopter type engines, that are sort of jet engines. They’re quite amazing,” says Ross Cameron, chair of the local host committee for the event that works directly with Poker Runs America, as well as the authorities in different towns they visit and the on-water authorities.

Cameron predicts the final turnout for registration this year may suffer a bit from the rising fuel costs, but that, he says, won’t keep boaters from the waters.

“They are thirsty,” he says of the boats, “But that’s what comes with the territory. It’s like people who continue to drive SUVs accept the fact that they’ve got to use more fuel than they would driving a little Smart Car.”

Cameron says the dollars paid in fuel costs don’t deter these boaters from participating.

“They’re less affected by this. It’s more like NASCAR racing and that sort of thing — they keep going on and doing the thing they love to do,” he says.

And doing what Kingstonians love to watch.

The Poker Run has been known to draw up to 60,000 spectators to the shores of all the towns it visits — and the run brings the boats to many Ontario cities.

“It’s a Canadian route throughout. They go from Kingston down under the Thousand Islands Bridge at Ivy Lea, past Rockport and into Brockville, which is where they have lunch,” says Cameron. The boats then head east to Prescott before turning around and coming back to Kingston.

Gregg Rosen is a local participant in the run who is looking forward to hitting the water for the weekend. His boat, a 46-foot flatdeck skater, is co-owned with his American partner, Rick Merloa. Together, Rosen and Merloa have collected some serious racing titles in 2007, including Nation Champions and Florida Champions, as well as ranking second in the world in 2007. But the Poker Run is fun they don’t miss out on, Rosen says.

“We’re all looking forward to it, our whole crew is. We’ve got about 20 people coming from our crew to participate in the poker run,” he says.

Rosen, and many of the other participants, will display their boats in Confederation Park Friday night and throughout the weekend.

The run begins Saturday at 10 a.m. and goes until 4 p.m., and runs again Sunday from 1-4 p.m. It is at these times spectators get the best look at these astounding vessels, says Doug Ritchie, managing director of Downtown Kingston! Business Improvement Area.

“The interesting time to see all the boats in Confederation Park, out on the Brock Street dock, over on Fort Henry Hill, and along the waterfront over to the Yacht Club, is 10 a.m., and then again at 4 p.m. when the boats return,” he says.

But that’s not all spectators can hope to see over the Poker Run weekend.

Confederation Park will be the hub of activity, with live music each day and events for the whole family.

“We have some interesting new stuff. The Queen’s solar car is going to be on display, and you can meet with the team that built it and races it,” says Ritchie.

“The Boat Smart tent will be up in the park, so if you want to learn about boating safety, or write the test for your boating license, you can do that.”

As well, Underwater Kingston will be hosting an array of displays and exhibits in Memorial Hall upstairs at City Hall, as well as at the Marine Museum of the Great Lakes. About a dozen exhibitors will fill Memorial Hall, with displays by the Canadian Diver’s Association, the Centre for Sustainable Watersheds, Deep Quest 2 Expeditions, and the Ontario Ministry of the Environment’s Preserve Our Wrecks. Free horse-drawn wagon rides will be offered from City Hall to the Marine Museum, where there will be more displays and a special exhibit of a ROV, or remotely operated underwater vehicle.

The ROV is a submarine-like vessel that spectators will be able to watch operated by remote control. It is equipped with a video camera feeding live footage to a bank of TVs on the shore at the museum.

“There is a wreck just 200 feet off of the Marine Museum’s shore, so this ROV will be going out and exploring this wreck and you’ll be able to watch the guy working the little dials and arms,” says Ritchie. “But you’ll also be able to look up at this bank of TVs at what the ROV is filming.”

Another addition this year is the Easter Seals Kid’s Boat Challenge. The event will take place on Saturday from 11 a.m. to 3 p.m. at Confederation Park, and will include face painting, a balloon artist and a fish pond.

Kids will make toy boats and then bring them to enter in the challenge. Chris Whyman, Kingston’s town crier, will judge the entries, with prizes awarded for most creative cruiser, sportiest schooner, and most life-like liner. Donations received will go to Easter Seals programs and services.


