---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20110406/"
title: "__Whig20110406"

---

##Access denied
By SAMANTHA BUTLER

<div class="column2">

Kingston residents are perturbed to see a fence has gone up around a popular piece of recreational waterfront land near Portsmouth Olympic Harbour.

Chris West, a representative of a local lake-swimming group called the Kingston Mermaids, said he encountered a chain-link fence around a Transport Canada coal dock, behind the former psychiatric facility in Portsmouth Village, on a March 20 walk.

"This is a beautiful piece of natural shoreline," West said. "All year long, that's why people go there ... (This fence) is not nice, and it's not nice for our waterfront. It reminds me of the prison."

Representatives from Transport Canada say the fence has been erected out of concern for public safety.

A March 7 letter from Transport Canada representative Gail Crossman to Kingston's Chief Administrative Officer Gerard Hunt, says:

"During the summer of 2010, Transport Canada conducted a safety inspection of the dock and found that the structure has deteriorated significantly and that it now poses a risk to the safety of the general public."

While the letter goes on to say no decision about the future of the coal dock has been made, a regional communications manager from Transport Canada, Brooke Williams, responded Tuesday that "restricting access to the public will allow Transport Canada time to determine the best course of action concerning the future of the coal dock."

West, and several of his fellow Kingston lake swimmers, say they are distressed that the new waterfront structure went up without public consultation.

"The waterfront has been removed," West said. "It's one thing for a piece of land to be closed down while it's being repaired. It's another thing for it to be removed from the inventory of waterfrontage that we have, and maybe gone for years and years."

West said he's been swimming from the former coal dock every morning from June to September since 2005, along with a dedicated group of 12 to 20 swimmers.

Some competitors in the K-Town triathlon also park at the dock to train in the lake twice a week, and many other groups meet there through the summer.

"On a hot day, you see just dozens of kids jumping off the dock."

"It would be nice if it could get this resolved between the city and Transport Canada," West said.

"If Transport Canada finds this land to be surplus to their needs, why wouldn't the city take it on? It's prime development land."

Williams said Transport Canad a would entertain an offer "from any interested party" to purchase the land.

"We encourage them to express their interest in writing," Williams said. This will begin the negotiations under the divestiture process."

Rick MacNaull at Kingston's Coast Guard said employees at his office had also been baffled to learn the dock was being taken officially out of commission.

A notice to shipping was broadcast to the mariners last November, he said, stating that "the coal dock is unserviceable and out of bounds for usage."

Dave Morris said he regularly jogs along the waterfront trail that starts from the coal dock, and feels entitled to use of the land as a taxpayer, whether it's purchased by the city or not.

"Taxpayers own the land," said Morris "and there's no reason that we should be denied access to it."

West contacted city councillor Dorothy Hector over Facebook with his concerns.

"Should I be upset that a higher level of government is protecting citizens from injury?" she replied.

Hector said she visited the site with city councillor Sandy Berg and found that "there continues to be walking space and a view of the lake."

"The response I've had from council," Morris said, "is that we can get around the fence. We can walk up a hill around to the path. But we've lost access to a piece of our waterfront."

Hector also suggested that West and Morris contact Kings - ton's federal MP, who could "take a stand" on the issue.

Morris said he sent letters to MP Peter Milliken, MPP John Gerretsen and Mayor Mark Gerretsen. He is awaiting their response.

In the meantime, so long as the property remains in the possession of Transport Canada, it seems unlikely the fence will come down.

"Transport Canada is committed to ensuring that structures under its administration and control are safe and that liability to the crown is minimized," Williams said.

"As such, the current type of fence was considered essential to ensure restricted access and public safety."

</div>

sbutler@thewhig.com

Article ID# 3061018

