---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20090924/"
title: "__Whig20090924"

---

##Bid to sink warship treading water
By IAN ELLIOT IELLIOT

<div class="column2">

The federal government would love to see the decommissioned HMCS Terra Nova sold to a local diving group that wants to turn it into a diving attraction.

The diving group would love to have it.

But plans to sink the 112-metre anti-submarine destroyer escort near Gananoque are facing an opponent more formidable than anything the ship faced on active service: provincial regulations.

Michael Ryan is a member of the Eastern Ontario Artificial Reef Association, a group of divers that has been trying to turn the boat into a diving attraction for several years.

He says the biggest holdup to date has been the Ontario government, and the maze of agencies that need to be consulted for the plan to proceed.

"We are still very interested in having it," he said yesterday, "but there isn't a policy for this sort of thing in Ontario, and we're having a hard time with all the agencies we have to consult to get permission to do this."

Most ships that are deliberately sunk are done so in salt water, not in the Great Lakes. Scuttling a ship at sea is not always easy, but there is a procedure in place.

While there are many wrecks in this area regularly explored by divers, they got there by accident over the years, not as a result of a planned sinking.

The diving group not only has to consult with the Ministry of Environment and other agencies with a mandate to preserve the ecosystem and aquatic life, but also with agencies such as the culture ministry.

"They want to make sure we're not dropping it on something else that might be on the bottom of the lake," Ryan explained.

The old destroyer would be cleaned up so it does not present an environmental dangers, have its interior cut apart so it doesn't present any hazards a diver could get snagged on, and then sunk in a place and in a depth of water where it wouldn't present a hazard to other boats.

The area being looked at for the Terra Nova is just east of Gananoque, in about130 feet of water four kilometres east of Brown's Bay.

The $2-million project has the enthusiastic support of local politicians who are eager to reap its economic benefits, and number of area councils have passed resolutions supporting the idea.

Proponents have said it could attract up to 6,000 divers annually, generating $8 million a year for the region's tourism economy.

The Department of National Defence, which reissued tender papers for the Terra Nova and a decommissioned sister ship this week, also wants the ship gone.

It has been tied up in Halifax for more than a decade while a new home for it is sought. As long as it stays there, besides the cost of stripping out asbestos and other components, Canadian taxpayers are footing bills for its storage, monitoring and regular hull repairs to fix leaks.

Documents on the state of the Terra Nova and HMCS Gatineau hint at the rough shape the vessels are in, citing hull leaks, rust, mould growth and possibly dangerous air quality below decks.

The divers won't buy the boat until they have what is known as a sink permit in hand from the government because the government requires that buyers tell them what they plan to do with the ship before they buy it as a condition of sale.

"We need to have that permit, because if we can't sink it, we're not allowed to really do anything else with it, and I don't really have a use for 450 tonnes of floating scrap steel," Ryan said.

The group will continue meeting with government officials and says such projects typically take at least four or five years to being to completion.

</div>

Article ID# 1766731
