---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20101218/"
title: "__Whig20101218"

---

##Wellington beef
By PAUL SCHLIESMANN

###Neighborhood resident Andy Williams created a Facebook page in opposition to the proposed Wellington Street extension.



The Wellington Street extension continues to be one of the most unpopular road projects Kingston hasn't built.

It's the subject of widespread criticism on its own Facebook page.

And the councillor representing the district where much of it would be located hates the plan.

"I'm opposed to the idea," said King's Town councillor Rob Hutchison, who says he has the backing of most of his constituents.

Starting from the foot of Bay Street, the two-lane, $16-million roadway would connect Wellington with John Counter Boulevard at the intersection with Elliott Avenue.

As it exists today, the proposed course consists of a pot-holed dirt road that runs alongside Doug Fluhrer Park between the Cat araqui River and Rideaucrest Home and then turns into a series of abandoned railroad property, much of it privately owned.

The extension would help alleviate north-south traffic volumes coming in on Montreal Street.

But it will not, city officials stress, help the traffic situation on Rideau Street.

The city recently installed a se-r ies of speed humps along Rideau -- not to divert cars and trucks but to slow them down.

The roughly 10,000 vehicles travelling the residential Rideau Street have been averaging 56 km/h -- well above the posted speed of 40 km/h.

"There's no question that the future extension of Wellington Street from Bay to Montreal will offer additional capacity in that north-south direction," city engineering director Mark Van Buren told the Whig-Standard.

"We will see some displacement of traffic off of Rideau. That won't address the speed of traffic on Rideau Street."

Wellington Street is currently closed to through traffic. The city has installed two large concrete barricades roughly on either end of the park.

In all seasons it is an almost impassable strip of dirt roadway. Yet Van Buren said there are no plans for interim work on that stretch of the street.

Construction on the downtown section, in fact, is not scheduled to begin until 2017.

Work on the northern stretch, the so-called "mid-block section," is scheduled to happen first, in 2015.

A length of abandoned railbed will connect John Counter Boulevard with Montreal Street, intersecting Montreal just north of the intersection with Railway and Rideau streets.

"That will get the benefit of improvement to the overall transportation network, but that road may help with the rejuvenation of industrial land in that area," said Van Buren.

It's in the vicinity of Doug Fluhrer Park where most of the controversy is generated.

Last spring, neighbourhood resident Andy Williams created a Facebook page called "Save Kingston's Waterfront," in opposition to the proposed roadway.

"This waterfront park is under attack. The City of Kingston is planning on building a major roadway through Fluhrer Park," he wrote.

The Facebook site attracted about 600 responses, three-quarters of them calling for the park space to stay as it is, said Wil - liams.

"That's one of the few waterfront parks we have and a road would definitely ruin the area," he said. "It's got potential. It's a nice quiet spot."

From the concrete retaining wall behind Rideaucrest Home Williams paced off the width of a roadway.

He said that at one point where a small creek flows into the Cataraqui, the parkland would only be the width of a sidewalk.

Hutchison said the Facebook sentiments reflect what he's been hearing from many of his constituents.

"As it's planned, most people in Kingston see it as something that would divide the neighbourhood and bring in more traffic," he said.

"It's one of the reasons I'm pursuing much better (public) transit. Traffic has a tendency to expand to fill space."

The councillor is also concerned about the size of the park space, currently just a narrow strip of land with a sidewalk near the shoreline.

Hutchison has asked staff in the past about whether it would be possible to dump fill into the water and extend the shoreline.

He was told approval would be needed from various provincial and federal ministries.

"It's a possibility, a hypothesis only," said Hutchison. "The bay is polluted and really not much use to anyone."

If the extension does get approval from council, Hutchison would prefer to see two lanes "with a good-sized median."

"I hope we would put in a parkway and we would expand Doug Fluhrer Park and devise different ways of accessing the park, like a pedestrian bridge and lights at Bay Street," he said.


pschliesmann@thewhig.com
Article ID# 2896233
