---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20100909/"
title: "__Whig20100909"

---

##Key player adds his support to city's world championship bid
By MIKE KOREEN

<div class="column2">

A Toronto man with an extensive background in international sport supports Kingston's bid for the 2014 International Sailing Federation world championships.

Paul Henderson, president of federation from 1994 to 2004 and a former member of the International Olympic Committee, believes Kingston is the perfect spot for the largest sailing regatta outside the Olympics.

"Can they win? Sure," Henderson said on Wednesday, one day after city councilors approved $920,000 in financial support if Kingston's bid to host the event is successful in February.

"Kingston isn't an unknown (city in the sailing world). Everybody knows the facility, everybody knows the town, everybody likes the town," Henderson said.

"It would be a hell of a thing for Kingston. You'd be shocked at how much money pours in (during the event)."

Other countries that have expressed interest in the 16-day, 1,000-boat, 1,400-athlete event are Denmark, China, France, South Korea and Spain.

Preliminary bids for the 2016 Olympic qualifier are due Oct. 15 with final bids needed for Dec. 1. Each bidder will then be allowed to send five people to ISAF offices in England for a presentation before the organization makes its decision early in the new year.

Henderson, who helped to found the Canadian Olympictraining Regatta, Kingston, was instrumental in bringing the 1976 Olympic sailing competition to Portsmouth.

He could be a very important player in the 2014 bid, CORK/ Sail Kingston chairman Tim Irwin said.

"He talked us into the whole thing," Irwin said. "He has the ear of all the top people in ISAF."

Henderson's successor as federation boss, Goran Petersson of Sweden, was vice-president of the organization when the Canadian was president.

The 10-class world championship concept was introduced in 2003 in Spain. The 2007 event was in Portugal with the 2011 competition slated for Australia (ISAF decided to push the 2015 event to 2014).

"I'll help any way I can," Henderson said. "I told them to go for it and I think they can win. Kingston will be happy they got into it."

A similar event to the ISAF worlds was held in Melbourne, Australia in 1999, leading to the creation of the new event.

Henderson, at the helm of ISAF at the time, said the event was a big hit with local politicians.

"The premier of the state of Victoria stood up at a cocktail party to welcome us and he said, 'I'd just like to tell you, in real dollars, the sailing world championships brought more money into Melbourne than the Formula One car race or the Australian Open tennis (tournament),' " Henderson recalled.

"He said 'You've got to understand, in Formula One, you've got to pay for the cars to come in ... and there is massive prize money. Same thing with tennis, but people here (for sailing) pay for their own boats, pay for the hotels, use the restaurants and there is no prize or appearance money.' "

Irwin figures $750,000 of the $7 million budget will come from registration fees. About 60% of the money required to stage the event will need to be covered by the provincial and federal governments.

While neither government has approved the spending, Irwin said he is optimistic.

"There have been very encouraging signs," said Irwin, who had Gary Lunn, the federal government's Minister of State (Sport), as a guest at the annual CORK regatta last month.

Irwin figures the organizing group will have to raise an additional $750,000 to make the event work. He said they must prove that all of their financing is in place before they submit their final bid.

Irwin said Kingston's location could give the city an edge.

"The International Sailing Federation has a white paper out saying they have to be less Eurocentric and move these things around the world," Irwin said.

"We've been working a lot harder than China and Korea and we've been much more closely in contact with ISAF and working with them."

</div>

Article ID# 2748714
mkoreen@thewhig.com

