---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20090122/"
title: "__Whig20090122"

---

##Release of big muskie draws praise###Act helps species to repopulate

By DOUG GRAHAM

<div class="column2">

The Gananoque chapter of Muskie Canada is heralding the catch and release of a 65-pound muskellunge for its importance in aiding to preserve the population of Canada's king of the freshwater fish.

Jim Hutchings, president of the local Muskies Canada, said when Dale MacNair returned his monster muskie to the water of the St. Lawrence last November, it was a good advancement for the species, which has been ravaged in recent years by a deadly virus.

"A lot of anglers would not have done what Dale did," Hutchings said. "He understands the muskie population in the St. Lawrence has had a fair amount of turmoil lately.

"We need to keep putting these fish back to keep the breeders and to have a population in the future.

More importantly, MacNair's muskie, measuring 57 inches in length and with a girth of 33 inches, was a female with several good years of spawning ahead.

The Ottawa resident was out fishing with Sal Rotolo, a longtime muskie angler from Gananoque, when he caught the trophy muskie. He has had a replicamadeof thefish.

Yesterday, while receiving official recognition for setting the world record for a catch-and-release muskie, MacNair downplayed the feat.

"I'm not about the record. If something like this comes along, that's great. But I'm promoting catch-and-release," said MacNair, who will have his name go up to the top of a catch and release muskie board, which is displayed on the outside wall of the Thousand Islands Chamber of Commerce building located in the town's west end.

The person at the top of the board with the biggest muskie released had been Hutchings, who hauled in a 50.7-pound muskie in 2005. Rotolo also is on the board for his 47.3-pound muskie released in 2007.

Hutchings said it is significant that following his big fish, there were two years when the biggest released muskies were below 40 pounds. Those were 2005 and 2006, years when a study by noted Queen's University biologist John Casselman showed a virus had decimated 50% of the adult muskie population in the river.

"We're struggling to get the population back up. That is why we need to release big muskie, especially after the die-off in those years," Hutchings said.

The Gananoque chapter covers the area from as far west as Belleville to the east at Brockville for its membership, which includes Kingston anglers.

Once bountiful in its population more than 40 years ago, muskie numbers declined in the 1970s due to overharvest and the destruction of traditional spawning areas from barge traffic on the St. Lawrence Seaway.

The size restriction for keeping a muskie, once set at a minimum of 28 inches, is now at 48 inches. The Gananoque chapter of Muskie Canada is pushing to move that mark up to 54 inches. The chapter, now in its 30th year, has a mandate to preserve the muskie fishery.

"Our organization is working very hard in the river. We do a seining [netting] program to try and identify spawning and nursery habitat," Hutchings said.

"We go back to the areas and monitor how the muskie are doing so each year we have a comparison.

"It took years to get that population coming back up, then we had the virus hit in 2005. Now we have to work again to try and get the fish population back up."

Rotolo said the big muskie MacNair caught and released must have come through the virus period unscathed.

"That's definitely a good sign," he said. "The virus hit the big trophy fish population hard. We found one muskie dead on shore that was 64 inches in length."

He also caught a 52-pound muskie, which wasn't healthy enough to survive when an attempt to release it was made.

Rotolo was ecstatic to see MacNair's muskie go back in the river.

"She still will be producing fish for more years. That's the beauty of it," he said.

"We are really promoting catch and release because it gives another angler a chance to catch the fish, which every year it is in the water is getting bigger and bigger."

</div>

Article ID# 1399014

