---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20080714/"
title: "__Whig20080714"

---

##Group seeks beach cleanup###Richardson site was once popular swimming spot

By Jordan Press

Over the entrance to the beach house at Richardson Beach is a simple engraving.

It is harder to see these days as tree branches cover it from view and as the limestone building grows old and grey.

"This building left by Captain George Taylor Richardson as a bequest to the children and citizens of Kingston," the inscription reads.

Once swimmers could walk underneath the marker, through the front doors facing King Street and then step down to the water to take a dip in one of the most popular water holes in the city.

Today, it is a public space in need of work so more members of the public can use it. A group of residents that have taken on the cause of giving the beach a facelift hope a mass swim later this month will be the impetus needed to turn plans for the beach into reality.

People using the beach will hopefully help restore it as a space for the public, said organizer Jamie Linton.

There are a lot of children and residents in the city who don't have access to a waterfront cottage or a backyard pool, Linton said. Restoring waterfront swimming areas, such as Richardson Beach, is also a message the mass swim is supposed to get out.

"We're really strongly motivated by the need to promote public access for all Kingstonians to the waterfront," Linton said.

On Tuesday, July 22, Linton and co-organizer David McDonald will take the plunge into the waters of Lake Ontario with whomever else shows up. The public health unit, the Kingston Historical Society and Lake Ontario Waterkeeper will be on site with information booths about Richardson Beach.

Residents are also likely to get a look at proposed plans for the area from the city's culture and recreation department, which will also have a booth at the event.

Richardson Beach, which is at the foot of Barrie Street, a few steps northeast from Murney Tower, used to be the hot spot for cooling off during the scorching days of summer. It featured a concession stand, lifeguards and change rooms. The old beach house stood as a beacon for the area, complete with marble wall treatments, plastered covered ceilings and limestone walls.

That was decades ago.

Today, the beach house just stands, a dark figure in need of work, much like the waterfront below it.

The city stopped spending money on the beach in the 1980s as part of cost-cutting measures. Except for routine maintenance, all public beaches in the city were left to their own fate.

The stone steps that lead to the water at Richardson Beach have grown slippery over time and underwater stones line the shore, a barrier to cross before heading out for a swim.

The only sandy civic beach is at Grass Creek Park off of Highway 2 in the east end. It is more than 15 kilometres east of Richardson Beach.

McDonald brought the idea of revitalizing Richardson Beach to a city hall committee in 2005. At the time, councillors voted to have city staff research where public beaches could be opened in Kingston with a report to outline findings and recommendations.

Three years after the presentation, nothing has officially come forward to council. McDonald said that at a meeting with city officials last month, large blueprints were unveiled showing what the culture and recreation department had come up with for the area.

McDonald admits he is frustrated at how long things have taken. Part of the problem, he said, is that the city undertook major projects, such as the K-Rock Centre, and didn't look as much at public spaces such as waterfront swimming areas.

"The question for me was why wasn't this happening?" he said. "These other major projects consumed resources at the city."

Two-thirds of the city's 12 beaches are open to the public for swimming today. The other four having been deemed too contaminated for swimming because of high E. coli bacteria levels.

Richardson Beach is among the eight still open, but it's not easy to take a dip in Lake Ontario from the spot at the foot of Barrie Street.

"As it is presently, it is very uncomfortable and dangerous," Linton said. "There are rocks that are slippery and difficult to negotiate. If you're going to go swimming there, you have to wear shoes."

Linton and others have cleared a path to the water over the past few weeks. A small path has been created from the shore to open water, the work of Linton and others who moved rocks from the area to make it more inviting for swimming.

However, Linton said, the area is far from safe just because a few rocks have been moved out of the way. Anyone coming to the mass swim on Tuesday, July 22, is being encouraged to bring water shoes. The swim begins at 6 p. m. with a public information session running from 6:30 to 8 p. m.
