---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20090129/"
title: "__Whig20090129"

---

##Sailor charts next course###Nathan Baron to tackle 1,700-kilometre solo trek again

By PATRICK KENNEDY



Unlike the batteries that failed him during last week's unsuccessful circumnavigation of the Bahamas in a sleek, 6.5-metre sailboat, Nathan Baron remains fully charged for another crack at his quest in the Caribbean.

Except now he faces another obstacle, as if the varying depths and unpredictable temperament of the waters south of Florida weren't enough. He must deal with a silent distraction that is capable of unnerving the steeliest of athletes.

Time.

Indeed the clock is ticking on Baron versus Bahamas, the demanding 1,700-kilometre solo sail that the Kingston man must complete in order to qualify for the 2009 Mini Transat - which is more than three times longer and, curiously, zig-zags across the Atlantic from France to Brazil. Again he'll be all by his lonesome, with only the sun and stars and the deep blue sea for company.

"I realize time is running short," conceded the married 32-year-old equipment control clerk at the Ministry of Transportation, who is both captain and crew of his boat, Boys and Girls Club of Canada. "I still have to qualify, get the boat packed and ship it to Europe."

As well, more qualifying tests await him in France.

"This will likely be my last chance," he said of his follow-up try sometime over the next fortnight. "It's not too late yet but it's getting closer to that point all the time. If I don't finish this one, I think I'd have to strongly consider pulling out.

"But," he quickly added, "there is no reason why I shouldn't finish it this time."

The initial attempt, an exhausting and at times harrowing adventure that tested both his sailing skills and sleep-deprivation limit, ended on the fifth day.

A steadily diminishing power source -two 12-volt batteries that provided the juice to run the boat's radio, the navigational lights, the GPS and, perhaps most critical, the auto helm instrument - forced an equally drained Baron to abort the endeavour at the midway point.

He noticed the problem on Day 2.

"The batteries weren't keeping up with the usage, which meant I had to run the [auto-helm] less, which of course restricted my sleep," said the Kingston Collegiate grad.

By the third day he was in "real conservation mode."  By Day 4, only the GPS was working and Baron was beat, plum tuckered out.

"I had no auto pilot and I'd only had a couple of hours sleep in the past two days," he said. "I was pretty tired when I made the decision to turn right."

That starboard turn brought him to port on the Bahamian island of Eleuthra, approximately 180 kilometres east of Nassau -and officially ended his mission.

"We still weren't sure what the problem was, why the batteries failed," Baron said. "I had Quantum Renewable Energy [of Kingston] on the [satellite] phone, trying to troubleshoot the problem over the phone."

This much he knew: His boat needed two new batteries, which in Kingston would set Baron back $150, but from the solar-panel expert on the pink-sand isle of Eleuthra, it cost him $425.

Sixty hours later, he sailed into Miami, his nerves frayed to a frazzle by fluctuating depths that occasionally offered disconcerting looks at large, jagged rocks just beneath the surface.

Baron's three-year, $250,000 campaign -he pointed out that 90% of that was raised "within the Kingston sailing community" -culminates with the Mini Transat race. The 7,000- kilometre cross-Atlantic voyage from La Rochelle, France to Salvador el Bahia, Brazil, takes place in November.

If Baron qualifies for the single-handed ocean race, his Boys and Girls Club craft would be the lone Canadian entry in the fleet of 72 small yachts.

As tiring as his ill-fated attempt to sail around the Bahamas was, it pales in comparison to his most terrifying time on water.

"That was last summer on Lake Ontario, 60-knot winds," he said. "I was never so scared in my life."



Article ID# 1409825

