---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20100608/"
title: "__Whig20100608"

---

##Reliving history
By IAN ELLIOT

<p>Photo:Crew members Don Craig (left) and John Foster on the Schooner La Revenante as it is presently docked at the Kingston Marina.</p>

<div class="column2">

Kingston will be the site of a naval re-enactment this weekend.

The star of the show, La Revenante, is a replica of the sort of schooner that plied the Great Lakes more than 100 years ago. It will be the mother ship in a display marking the 100th anniversary of the Canadian Navy.

The graceful, two-masted vessel known as a pinky and a fleet of smaller longboats similar to the whalers that are still used by the Navy will make their way east from Portsmouth Olympic Harbour starting about 9 a.m. Saturday.

About 50 historical re-enactors will take part, recreating the maneuvers and tactics of the old lake vessels.

"We'll be wearing authentic historical uniforms, there will be cannons firing, it's going to be a lot of fun," Vernon Fairhead, who owns the boat with Dr. John Wootten, said at the Kingston Marina where the boat was put into the water.

The two brought the schooner, which at just over 20 metres, is about as large a vessel as can be legally moved on the highway, into Kingston Thursday night.

Along the way, the boat collided with a cube van, but in testament to the strength of the wooden ship, the van took the worst of it.

"She's solidly built," observed Fairhead.

"There isn't a bit of plywood in her. Underneath the skin there's radar, GPS and all the modern technology, but she's built the old-fashioned way."

The two men began kitting the boat out Friday, mounting the ship's masts and preparing it for a summer sailing season that will see it make appearances at Chicago's tall ship festival and other events.

It's a wooden boat, so the first time it was floated, the two had to monitor the water leaking in below decks as the wood filled out.

"It's like a big barrel, it leaks until the wood swells up," Wootten said.

The two were hired by the Navy for this weekend's event and say given the naval history of Kingston -- the city began as a British naval dockyard and was a key strategic outpost for the British in North America -- they wouldn't have missed it.

"We're proud to take part in this," said Wootten.

The Royal Navy Dockyard, which built ships that fought in the War of 1812, operated from 1788 to 1853 at the site where Royal Military College now stands.

Kingston was the only Royal Navy base on Lake Ontario, countering the United States naval base in Sackets Harbour, N.Y., during the War of 1812.

La Revenante was a labour of love, initially built by a tugboat captain in Boston in his back yard in the 1960s.

Fairhead and Wootten turned it into a naval recreation vessel, refitting the craft over several years while it was sitting in Fairhead's farmyard in the Ottawa valley.

"My neighbours call me Noah with this boat sitting in front of my house," Fairhead joked.

It is painted in authentic colours, including the inside of the gunwales, which are painted red like all British warships were so that young sailors would not panic in battle when blood started spattering across the decks in battle.

The re-enactment this weekend will finish at RMC and will be visible from anywhere along the lakefront Saturday morning.

</div>

Article ID# 2612544

