---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20100723a/"
title: "__Whig20100723a"

---

##Boat runs aground
By TYLER BALL

<div class="column2">

Mike Efford didn't expect to begin his first visit to Kingston with his boat aground but yesterday morning he found himself high and dry.

Efford was piloting Mi-T-Mo, his 20-metre decommissioned United States Army tug transport in Confederation Basin, waiting for marina staff to assign him a slip, when he ran aground.

"They were going to tell me where to go," he said. "I'm waiting and waiting and then I kind of drifted ... I don't see a slip that's big enough to hold me."

He then saw a smaller boat exit the marina through a 15-metre gap between Shoal Tower and the breakwater that borders the downtown marina.

"Well, I'll go out this way and go around and come back in," he said.

Unfortunately, Mi-T-Mo's draft is two metres too deep for the approximately 1.5-metres of water in the gap.

Typically, there is a marker in the gap warning boaters of the shallow waters.

"The coast guard came to me and did a report," Efford said. "He said, 'Yeah you're right, there's supposed to be a buoy here."

The buoy was white with orange markings, clearly marking the danger.

A marina employee said the buoy may have been taken by the ice in the winter.

Although the City of Kingston operates the marina, city officials said the responsibility of replacing and setting markers fall on the Department of Fisheries and Oceans.

On July 4, the Algobay, a 225-metre lake freighter, ran aground east of Gananoque on a shoal and was freed the next day.

The water level in the St. Lawrence River typically reaches its highest level in mid-summer, but low snowfall and a dry spring are making the river levels lower than normal.

In addition, the International Joint Commission, the binational authority in charge of the water levels of the Great Lakes and the St. Lawrence, typically lowers the water level in late summer to address the needs of shipping further downriver.

The commission reported in April that the Port of Montreal was already experiencing lower than average water levels.

Luckily for Efford, a good Samaritan with a motorboat created a wave large enough for Mi-T-Mo, registered in Baltimore, Md., to break free.

Efford was stuck for more than two hours, which he used to shift cargo to the front of the boat, to try to lift the stuck stern.

"We got in here about 10:40 and didn't get out until about 1 o'clock," he said. "I literally stopped and had lunch ... the embarrassment was already there."

</div>


Article ID# 2681504

