---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20111001a/"
title: "__Whig20111001a"

---

##Trimming back time
By ELLIOT FERGUSON

<div class="column2">

The landscape around Fort Henry could look a lot different months from now if Parks Canada follows through on a plan restore the grounds to their historical state.

The agency is about to launch a two-year program to remove vegetation, including mature trees, from areas around the fort.

The Fort Henry Landscape Conservation Plan is designed to restore the views from the fort to what they were in the 19th century and to protect underground archeological sites.

The first phase of the restoration plan is to begin in the late fall and is to include the use of heavy equipment and the spot application of herbicide to prevent tree sprouting.

The plan also calls for replanting trees in selected areas.

The Fort Henry plan follows a similar project at Upper Canada Village earlier this year, where between 60 and 100 trees were removed.

In an e-mail, Jennifer Duquette, National Historic Sites Program Manager for Eastern Ontario, said the proposal to restore the Fort Henry site is the result of a 2007 management plan that identified threats to the archeological and historical integrity of the site.

Duquette said it had not been determined how many trees would be removed in the restoration.

"A national historic site's landscape is often an important part of its designation," Duquette said. "In Fort Henry's case, the landscape is a key element of the fortification's national historic significance, one that reinforces the military character of the site and provides visual evidence of the design, purpose and occupation of the site."

The views from the fort show visitors how it protected the mouth of the Cataraqui River, Kingston harbour and the War of 1812-era dockyard, Duquette said.

Any tree that is a native species and does not threaten archeological sites or impede the views from the fort will be left intact, Duquette said.

Other national historic sites, such as Bellevue House, are maintained in a period appropriate manner and do not require restoration.

Parks Canada does not need any permission from the city to remove trees on federal property, said city spokesperson Cindie Ashton.

But the department's proposed work is not sitting well with some city councillors, who said the plan goes too far in calling for a clear cutting of the site.

"They're being a little too aggressive," said city councillor Brian Reitzel, whose Pittsburgh district includes Fort Henry.

"Their idea was to clear cut everything."

While the fort was in operation as a military base, the land between the water's edge and the fort walls was kept clear of vegetation to deny any attacking troops cover.

"In today's world that is not necessary," said Reitzel, adding that the need to restore the historical views should be balanced with current environmental concerns.

He said trees along the shoreline provide protection for fish species.

Reitzel said he would like to see Parks Canada hold a public meeting to gather input from the Kingston community.

He also said the there is a provincial guideline that requires municipalities to be 30% forested.

Reitzel said he would like to see a compromised reached where individual trees are removed.

"It would be nice if they respected our wishes," he said.

In July, Reitzel and Collins-Bayridge district city councillor Lisa Osanic offered a compromise proposal to Parks Canada aimed at preserving some of the trees and vegetation along the shoreline.

The proposal would involve selective removal of specific non-native trees in an area northeast of the fort building and along the shoreline of Point Henry.

The compromise proposal included keeping vegetation along the shoreline while removing vegetation farther up the hill toward the fort.

Osanic's and Reitzel's proposal also included the construction of a large model of the fort's condition in 1848 for display in the Discovery Centre.

Any tree planting that is conducted should involve native species, such as oak and black walnut, the councillors proposed.

There would be a chance for public input but a timeline for such consultation schedule is yet to be determined, Duquette said.

</div>

eferguson@thewhig.com

Article ID# 3319073
