---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20080805/"
title: "__Whig20080805"

---

<div class="column2">
##Festival gives enthusiasts a chance to dive in
By JORDAN PRESS

The Murky Green Waters IN Deadman Bay silence the voice of the War of 1812 ship spread along the bottom.

The bow still arches up toward the surface about three metres away, but the thick wooden slats are covered in green water plants and zebra mussels. Fish swim around its ruins.

On this day, myself and Kenn Feigelman, director of DeepQuest2 Expeditions, are the only humans swimming around. Our dive master, Adam Rushton, watches from the deck of his boat.

"Very few people know that it's here, unless they're divers,"Rushton says when we're onboard and cruising around.

Kingston shoreline. This weekend, a group of local diving enthusiasts and companies will gather downtown in two locations for the first ever Kingston Underwater festival. The weekend event coincides this

There are hundreds of wrecks all over the area like the one in Deadman Bay.

An event this coming weekend aims to give people a chance to get their toes wet in the world of diving right from the year with the annual poker run, although the two events are not related.

The underwater event will have displays at Memorial Hall and outside the Marine Museum to show off some of the latest diving technology and give experienced and inexperienced divers a chance to get a feel for what it's like to be underwater.

The event has a number of components to attract serious divers, those who have an interest in diving and, according to organizer Gord Blake, "the great unwashed - those who are curious." They could be curious about diving or exploring wrecks they may only associate with being somewhere in the ocean.

At the Marine Museum, divers will swim in the drydock around the Alexander Henry along with a remote-operated underwater vehicle that will send pictures and real-time images of the underside of the ship to a bank of monitors inside a trailer set up on the site. Visitors will be able to touch the technology and talk to divers.

The museum will also have displays about the underwater wrecks in the area and dip into diving history.

The event brings the Marine Museum back to its roots. When the museum was founded more than three decades ago, a group of divers was at the helm.

And it was a group of divers who conjured up the idea of an underwater expo for the city.

The main thrust for the weekend is to promote the area as a place for freshwater diving. And what would bring the divers to the area? Exactly what I went diving for on the weekend -ship wrecks more than a century old. Couple that with relatively calm waters, and you have a good diving destination, organizers said.

The problem, organizers said, is that word of the good diving conditions in Kingston hasn't spread.

"It is a significant dive location. There's been some fear in the industry that we're losing business to Brockville," said Ann Blake, executive director of the Marine Museum. "There's another whole museum out there that nobody is aware of."

This part of the Great Lakes is a mass underwater graveyard for ship wrecks. The number of boats that have disappeared between Kingston and Prince Edward County is similar in nature to the infamous Bermuda Triangle and its strange habit of swallowing boats and planes into nothingness.

The local triangle is known as the Marysburgh Vortex. There are estimated to be 450 wrecks in the vortex with about 80 shipwrecks known to exist in the area from Kingston to Prince Edward County, such as a passenger freight ship called the Comet; the George A. Marsh, a three-masted schooner with the wheel still intact; and a series of wrecks by Amherst Island, including two old steamers and a paddle wheel boat.

That list also includes the one Feigelman took me out to Sunday.

While Feigelman calmly swam around underwater with the help of a scuba tank, I climbed to and dived from the surface with the help of an underwater scooter, which looks like a small torpedo with handles and a propeller to make my jaunt through the water easier.

The long, rectangular wooden planks that must have looked majestic when they lay side-by-side on this ship nearly 200 years ago have not lost their shape and the outline of the boat's body can be easily seen just by snorkeling over it. And yet it is fragile from years of being underwater, making touching out of the question.

The only sounds I hear are the breathing from Feigelman's scuba gear and the whirl of the propeller as it takes me through the water.

A shower of sunshine slices through the water leaving a trail of rays to the surface. The plant life on the wreck hardly dances.

Searching for these wrecks is not an easy process. It takes hours of research to prepare for an expedition. It could take hours more of searching with a sonar device to find a wreck.

Sometimes you stumble on one when you least expect it.

"The excitement is in seeing a wreck and to be there first," Feigelman said.

Organizers are hoping some of that excitement rubs off on people this weekend and sends more divers into the waters around Kingston.

----

For more information on the Kingston Underwater event, visit the event website at www.kingstonunderwater.ca.
</div>

