---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20090103/"
title: "__Whig20090103"

---

Whig Standard editorial, Saturday Jan 3 2009  (http://www.thewhig.com/ArticleDisplay.aspx?e=1371403)

##Give a boost to tourism###OUR VIEW

<div class="column2">

Critics of city council spending over the past few years, especially where the K-Rock Centre is concerned, should be glad to see the latest wish list out of city hall.

Using anticipated federal gas-tax funding, staff have recommended the following projects: expanding the west-end water plant (at a cost of $37.4 million); widening John Counter Boulevard ($54 million); and constructing a new public works building ($30 million).

These are all sensible, straightforward infrastructure expenditures that will benefit many Kingstonians.

Just prior to Christmas, the federal and provincial governments announced the extension of the gas-tax funding program through to 2014, guaranteeing $7.2 million to Kingston each year.

Most economists agree that in this time of financial uncertainty, our senior governments need to spend more to prevent a deeper slide into recession.

What better way to provide those fiscal stimuli than through municipal infrastructure programs? In fact, Finance Minister Jim Flaherty got it all wrong when he selected his blue-ribbon panel of advisers -most of them the CEOs and leaders of well-known Canadian corporations.

Flaherty should have simply asked the mayors of big and small municipalities to draw up their wish lists. Then all he would have had to do is sign the cheques and get the shovels in the ground.

Two of the most notable projects left off the Kingston list are the proposed 50-metre swimming pool and aquatic centre and the bridge across the Cataraqui River, better known as the third crossing.

Having built both the downtown K-Rock Centre and the multi-pad arena in the west end, taxpayers are wary of the pool project. They want to see their money spent on basic infrastructure, like fixing roads and sidewalks, and even the swimming community is divided over the concept of an Olympicsize pool.

The third crossing proposal has yet to clear environmental hurdles before it can be considered for political approval. Besides, we haven't yet experienced consistent gridlock on the La Salle Causeway, so a sense of urgency hasn't developed in order to move forward the Cataraqui bridge.

Still, there remains a glaring omission on the infrastructure wish list, and that is the refurbishment of the pier near the Marine Museum of the Great Lakes to accommodate cruise ships.

The Great Lakes Cruising Coalition has asked Kingston to join its Canada-U. S. organization and become one of the communities that welcomes the ships carrying as many as 300 tourists.

The Crawford Wharf at Confederation Basin has been identified as a temporary location. But plans already exist to develop the pier near the marine museum as a permanent docking site, making it a real tourism destination.

The cruise lines want to land in Kingston. It is seen as a prime location. Even Bruce O'Hare, a representative with the cruising coalition from Little Current on Manitoulin Island, said Kingston is missing out on a good deal.

"We've attracted millions of dollars in waterfront development that I'm convinced would never have happened without the cruise ships." O'Hare told the Whig Standard.

This is a no-brainer, folks. A new pier would provide a tremendous boost to the city's tourism industry with little or no financial risk.

</div>

Article ID# 1371403

