---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20101211/"
title: "__Whig20101211"

---

##Flashing red lights on turbines irritating
Letters to the Editor



My wife and I have $30,000 invested in renewable energy equipment. For three years we lived off the grid, generating all of the electricity we needed from a small wind-solar hybrid system. We ended the experiment only after the repeated failure of our small, less-than-reliable wind turbine. We then added more solar panels and connected back to the grid. I think it would be fair to say that we are believers in renewable energy.

However, like many Wolfe and Simcoe islanders, we were somewhat apprehensive about the prospect of 86, 120-metre tall wind turbines being erected within view of our "bit of paradise," the vacation home we built in 2002-03 on the south shore of Simcoe Island, which is home, incidentally, of the oldest active Canadian lighthouse on the entire Great Lakes.

The Wolfe Island wind farm has been operating for two years now and most islanders are at least resigned to, if not fully accepting of, the fact that, for the foreseeable future, their landscape will, for all intents and purposes, look like that back of the world's biggest porcupine, bristling with these gargantuan "quills."

As it happens, the biggest irritant for many of the roughly 250,000 people in the area, including the entire city of Kingston, the Township of Frontenac Islands, and northern New York State, is the impact of the flashing red navigation lights (to warn approaching aircraft) on top of these giant turbines that have effectively destroyed their view of the night sky. Our once-spectacular view of the Milky Way, Orion and the Big Dipper, have been effectively annihilated by the obscenity of 20-plus red lights, flashing in unison every few seconds, every night, all night long.

But, it needn't be this way. Modern, radar-activated warning lights could, and should, be installed instead of these archaic, constantly flashing red lights that pollute the night sky for everyone.

It's not too late to insist that Trans-Alta retrofit this modern technology that would go a long way to making wind farms more acceptable and less irritating to the people forced to live near or among them.

Even more alarming for us was the recent approval by your government of the Wolfe Island Shoals off-shore wind farm, which will put some 60-plus of these behemoths directly in our view as our (now-somewhat-compromised) piece of paradise on the south shore of Simcoe Island looks out over the open Lake Ontario with a (not-as-yet-but-soon-to-be-obstructed) view of several historic lighthouses whose blinking lights have for the past seven years bid us good night and served as a gentle reminder that, for the time being at least, all is still well with the world.

Premier Dalton McGuinty, do the right thing. Get rid of the flashing red lights and replace them with radar-activated lights. And from here on in, insist that all new wind farms be so equipped.

It's the least you can do.


Yelda Miedema
Simcoe Island

