---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20110901a/"
title: "__Whig20110901a"

---

##Boom and bust
TOWNHOUSE PROJECT: Kingston construction companies tell story of promisedpayments and bouncing cheques

By PAUL SCHLIESMANN


The sudden revival of an upscale townhouse project on the west bank of the Cataraqui River has local contractors seeing red.

Red ink, that is, left from when Toronto development company Stirling Bridge Ltd. walked away from the 144-unit River Park project earlier this summer.

When construction halted at the development, an estimated $1 million was owing to more than a dozen out-of-town and local tradespeople-- framers, plumbers, electricians and drywallers -- as well as building materials suppliers.

After legal proceedings, that number has been shaved to under $500,000 -- money that will likely never be recovered for work done and materials delivered.

Three Kingston construction companies, at one time owed more than $100,000 between them, tell similar, frustrating stories of promised payments and bouncing cheques.

It's a boondoggle they say rarely occurs in the tight-knit world of Kingston construction.

George Syllas, lead hand on the project's first framing crew, said they had worked out a deal with Stirling Bridge to receive $19,000 still owing for their work.

"They were going to give us $5,000 every two weeks," said Syllas, who feared that putting a lien on the project would get them nothing in return.

The framing company didn't take legal action.

They're still owed the $19,000.

Now Stirling Bridge, the new site management company Greycliff Homes, and the chief backer, Morrison Financial, all say there's nothing they can do to make reparations.

The last straw came for Syllas when he learned the project had re-started under Greycliff, based in Concord, Ont., with new companies doing the work.

Last week, a number of liens -- legal actions seeking compensation against the property -- were paid off, allowing Greycliff to continue construction work.

Sales are also proceeding through the onsite real estate office.

When Syllas looks at River Park he sees nothing but the hundreds of thousands of dollars owed his firm and others.

"They came to Kingston and screwed up the small businesses," he said. "How are they allowed to do that?"

Everyone agrees that Stirling Bridge had a winning project when it conceived the 144-townhouse River Park community at the intersection of John Counter Boulevard and Montreal Street, with its commanding view of the Cataraqui River.

"I love it," said Hazel MacDonald, who bought one of the units last year. "I have a kayak, so I can take it to the water. We walk downtown. I take my bike on the trail."

About two dozen or so of the freehold units have been completed on the 5.6-hectare property.

For months, several rows sat dormant in various states of construction, some with large gaps in the roofs. Only the first block of five homes has been completely finished.

In the block nearby, where MacDonald lives, there has been no landscape work done. Most of the units have no steps leading to doorways. Stylish parapets are unpainted.

Roads remain unpaved. While the units are individually owned, the network of streets falls under a condominium agreement, meaning the residents will be responsible for their upkeep and plowing, not the city.

Delayed 10 months before she could move in after buying her home, MacDonald applied to and received compensation from the Tarion Warranty Corporation plan, privately run but set up by the provincial government to assist homeowners.

For MacDonald, things are looking up.

The homeowners recently received a letter from Greycliff owner Frank Casamatta telling them that his company will take River Park "to the next level, so watch for a lot more site activity as construction resumes."

MacDonald was excited last week to see a bulldozer working in her backyard.

Basement forms were being poured on brand-new units.

"For a long time we were stagnant and nothing was going on," she said. "Right now it's positive because they're doing things."

*

Land registry documents show that Stirling Bridge Ltd. bought the land from a group of six owners for $660,000 in March 2006.

The company website says 3,500 tonnes of hydrocarbon-contaminated soil, concrete and bedrock were taken off the property.

When Stirling Bridge put out the call for subcontractors, Bill Allen was eager to jump in -- both as a plumbing and heating contractor and a home buyer.

His MPS Mechanical company installed plumbing in the first 25 units and heating ductwork in eight of them.

Allen bought three of the houses, which he rents out.

"I thought it was a great project. I still think there's potential to turn it around," he said. "I didn't know. I thought Stirling Bridge would roll in and do a great job."

Allen checked out the websites for Stirling Bridge and the main backer, Morrison Financial, both of which indicated "all kinds of experience" in townhouse construction and brownfield development.

Stirling Bridge registered with the Kingston Home Builders Association. The ribbon-cutting to kick off the project was attended by Mayor Mark Gerretsen, Kings - ton and the Islands MPP John Gerretsen and other officials.

Real estate agents had been hired for sales work and the model home, on which Allen's company worked, looked good.

Allen even heard that while the first block of five units was being built, 33 units were pre-sold.

By last fall, however, he was seeing problems and patterns he didn't like, both as an owner and a subcontractor.

"They were forever building mine," he recalled, but because he believed there was money coming in from sales, he work to meet his deadlines.

The stories told by Allen and Syllas about River Park are all too familiar to drywall company owner Tony Rodrigues. He and his crew also worked on the first five units. They were paid $30,000, but he said he is still owed about $16,000.

"It had nothing to do with our work," said Rodrigues. "They were happy with the work."

After finishing the drywalling, and receiving only partial payment, Rodrigues called Stirling Bridge continually for about seven months to get his $16,000.

"I'm just a small-time guy. I've got maybe 10 employees. For me, that's a big hit," he said.

"They had every excuse. They kept telling me the cheque was in the office. Then, to top it all off, (the site supervisor) gave me an owner's number and he promised me he would make payments of $5,000 until it was through."

Rodrigues said he never received those final instalments, and because he waited more than 30 days to bill, it was too late to put a lien on the property.

"I think they came into town thinking they could take advantage of the Kingston trades. They were behind on payments from the start," said Rodrigues.

Work he was promised on subsequent townhouse units never materialized, Rodrigues said, "because I was bugging them."

Allen has turned a number of scenarios over in his mind, trying to figure out how and why the River Park townhouse project went bad for so many Kingston contractors like himself.

It's his estimate, from having talked to a number of Kingston subcontractors and material suppliers, that Stirling Bridge owed as least $1 million when it abandoned the development this summer.

Allen managed to track down Stirling Bridge vice-president Jeff Wilson to inquire about the money he never received.

MPS Mechanical, he said, was owed "$72,000 and change." About $33,000 of that has been recovered through a lien.

"I did reach him and his claim is Morrison Financial had not been supportive with the funds. Their story isn't they haven't gotten any money. When the heavy liens went on block 23 -- I believe there was a half million dollars in liens -- that put a stop to it," said Allen.

The Whig-Standard has found that liens with dollar values included on the land registry totalled $544,685. Most of those were placed by To ro nto-area companies.

Those were cleared from the land title last week.

"It hurts us, the cash flow," said Allen. "We need the money. Employees need to be paid. The lights need to stay on."

pschliesmann@thewhig.com
Source: http://www.thewhig.com/ArticleDisplay.aspx?e=3283198
