---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20091201/"
title: "__Whig20091201"

---

##Torch to sail into city###OLYMPICS: CORK official gets creative when it comes to the Olympic torch's arrival in Kingston

By MICHAEL LEA MLEA



The torch for the 2010 Winter Olympic Games in Vancouver has been in a plane, a canoe, a ferry, a surfboard and a dog sled. Tim Irwin is pretty sure he will be the first to carry it on a sailboat.

Irwin, current chairman of the board of directors for the Canadian Olympic Training Regatta Kingston, will be sitting on the bow of a sailboat holding the torch as it sails into the Portsmouth Olympic Harbour Dec. 15.

Councillor Dorothy Hector had contacted CORK to see what part the city could play in the torch's arrival in Kingston in two weeks.

"I kicked this around and we thought it would be fun to sail the torch into the harbour," said Irwin.

The flame's arrival would also showcase the Tetra statue built for the 1976 Olympic sailing events at Portsmouth Olympic Harbour, he said.

"Even when they started to talk about CORK doing it, it never occurred to me that they would ask me to carry the torch, and, of course, I was absolutely delighted"

The torch arrives in Kingston at the Springer Market Square at 5:30 p. m. on Dec. 14 and Irwin and his crewmates will sail it on a Soling-class sailboat in the early morning of Dec. 15. The boat belongs to Tim Garrett, who will also have his five-year-old son on board. A couple more crew members will also be invited, said Irwin.

While the others will handle the actual sailing, Irwin will be on the bow holding the torch.

"My 'run' is supposed to start at 6:58 a. m.," he said.

Not 6:57 a. m. and not 6:59 a. m., he added.

"They have got this thing scheduled with military precision."

Since the progress of their sailboat will normally depend entirely on the wind--which tends not to care a lot about governmental schedules -- Irwin has come up with a backup plan to ensure the sailboat arrives when it is supposed to.

He will strap a small, powered rubber boat to the side of the Soling, hopefully out of view of the cameras, and use it power to sailboat into port.

That should work if there is too little wind, he said. "If it is really blowing, which I suppose it could, I'm not quite sure how we will handle that."

It is hoped some kind of social gathering will greet the sailboat as it comes in and lots of people have promised to be there, said Irwin.

"If everybody who said that will be there it will be hundreds but at 7 o'clock in the morning on a cold, wintery morning, who knows?"

Irwin believes he will land on a dock next to the Tetra statue and then walk up the dock for the next handover. But a lot of the details are still to be worked out, he said.

Irwin's love of sailing goes back to when he was just seven years old and his dad bought a boat while they were living on the west coast.

"He didn't know how to sail. He was from the prairies," Irwin remembered. "It was a great big, wide boat and quite safe. He sort of dumped me in this thing and away I went."

Irwin said it was the sense of freedom sailing provides hooked him on the sport.

"I just loved it," he said. "The wind, the waves. I could go and be independent.

"And part of it is, as I went along, I was successful at it, competitively."

Carrying the torch won't be Irwin's first taste of the Olympic Games. He had competed in the sailing event along with Steve Tupper and David Miller, both from Vancouver, in the Mexico City Olympics in 1968, coming fourth in their class.

A highlight of the games was waking into the huge Olympic stadium with the other athletes. "That was an amazing experience," he said. "I was not prepared for that at all."

He had been positioned at the front of the column of marching athletes and was supposed to set the pace and the step.

When he walked into the stadium and was greeted by the roar and cheers of 80,000 people "my legs just turned the rubber," he recalled.

"I could hardly even walk."



Article ID# 2200089

