---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20070612/"
title: "__Whig20070612"

---

<strong>Dry dock, ho!; Alexander Henry allowed to move</strong>

Brock Harrison
Local News - Tuesday, June 12, 2007 @ 00:00

The red and white ship that has become a staple of Kingston's waterfront is on the move.

The Alexander Henry will be lifted off its deteriorating moorings on Lake Ontario and moved into the dry dock at the Marine Museum of the Great Lakes.

Museum chairman Mark Siemons received permission from the federal public works department on Friday to move the ship, which has been converted to a museum and bed and breakfast, onto dry land where it will be more secure and shielded from the elements.

The outer dock where it is currently anchored is more than 100 years old and deteriorating rapidly, Siemons said.

"The fear was that the bollards it is anchored to could break off at any time and the ship would just float away," Siemons said.

Siemons said public works needed a sign from the city that it also wanted the Alexander Henry moved inland and it got that sign last week when city council approved spending of up to $175,000 to repair and possibly rebuild the bollards on the outer dock.

The approval comes just in time. Siemons said the boat needed to be moved before June 15. After that, water levels would have receded to a point that would make it impossible for the ship to clear the lip leading into the dry dock.

If approval from Ottawa was denied or came late, the only other option for the city would be to scrap the ship at a cost of $50,000. The city leases the museum grounds on Ontario and West streets from the federal government and the agreement expires this November. The city wants to buy the property, but also wants assurances that it won't have to pay for repairs to the site. City staff estimated the costs to upgrade the site could reach as high as $8.5 million over the next 10 years.

Retired from service in 1985, the Alexander Henry generates $100,000 a year, or about 20 per cent of the Marine Museum's annual business, and has hosted more than 60,000 visitors.

The move, which will see the 50-year-old icebreaker vessel towed 70 yards inland, is expected to happen on Thursday or Friday, Siemons said.

