---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20100821/"
title: "__Whig20100821"

---

##City staff suggest partial relief
PAUL SCHLIESMANN



City staff are recommending $47,500 be turned over to the Marine Museum of the Great Lakes to keep the cash-strapped facility operating.

The amount falls short of the $65,000 request sent to city council by the museum's directors after one of its main income sources, the Alexander Henry bed-and-breakfast ship, was closed due to the discovery of asbestos.

The museum has had to drastically reduce its staff to one full-time position. It has two students working on grant money and is relying heavily on volunteers.

"We are pleased staff are recommending something along the lines of our request," said museum board chairman Mark Siemons. "If we get the money, we'll be ensuring we remain open, (but) obviously we would rather have what we asked for."

The payout recommended by city staff is broken down into $32,500 for operating costs and $15,000 to enable museum and city staff to work together on a new business plan.

Staff balked at meeting the full funding request, describing the museum finances as "unsustainable."

The city already contributes $65,000 annually to the marine museum.

Siemons said he was pleased with the offer to sit down with city staff and work on a long-term plan for 2011.

"I do believe we do need some time and staff needs to get direction," he said.

The staff report also notes the additional funding made available to the museum over the years for:

* repairs to the physical plant in 2005;

* waiving of an 18-year outstanding loan for $65,000;

* an additional $60,000 toward the 2007 budget;

* building renovations worth $110,000 and Alexander Henry costs of $175,000;

* site engineering studies worth $195,000.

While staff are offering a lesser amount, councillors will have two other recommendations in front of them -- to not extend the bridge funding at all or to meet the full request for $65,000.

Councillors will consider the report at Tuesday's council meeting at City Hall.



Source http://kingstonwhigstandard.com/ArticleDisplay.aspx?archive=true&e=2723168

Article ID# 2723168

