---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20100318/"
title: "__Whig20100318"

---

## No longer a threat
By PETER HENDRA



A study released yesterday that found mercury to be among the catalogue of contaminants found in the city's Inner Harbour is nothing to worry about, according to the head of the group studying the area.

"Mercury is really a very minor contaminant in the harbour, and it probably isn't having the same effect the other contaminants (such as chromium, lead and PCBs) are," said Ken Reimer, head of the Environmental Sciences Group headquartered at Royal Military College.

Reimer has spearheaded the Cataraqui River Inner Harbour Stakeholders Group since 2006.

He said that mercury is "relatively benign" in its inorganic form as opposed to methylmercury, which is far more toxic.

"Personally, I think PCBs are more worrisome because they bio-magnify very easily and you don't need to transform them into something to have them be accumulated in wildlife, whereas mercury has to be transformed by this inorganic form to this methylated form," Reimer said.

The study -- published yesterday in the journalScience of the Total Environment-- was conducted by Queen's University PhD student Nathan Manion, biology professor Linda Campbell and Allison Rutter, director of the analytical services unit in the environmental studies department.

Manion said that the group focused strictly on mercury rather than others such as PCBs, lead and chromium.

"All of these contaminants are all in the sediment, and the main reason they're there is due to those old industrial sites that are still contributing some contamination even though they are no longer in use," Manion said.

The study found that the mercury levels in the sediment along the harbour were twice that of the federal government's "severe effect limits."

Severe effect limits, co-author Campbell explained in an e-mail, were devised by the Canadian Council of Environment Ministers.

"It means that the mercury concentrations being measured in the sediments has a strong likelihood of some toxicity for fish and invertebrates in the region," she wrote.

"It does not refer to human exposure, but is a way to assess environmental concentrations for biological organisms."

Reimer said that fish, aside from bottom-dwellers, tend to have contaminant levels below the consumption advisories. He said that it isn't a single contaminant but a combination that's "driving any kind of the biological consequences in the river."

The Queen's study found the highest concentration of mercury around the Kingston Rowing Club at the foot of Cataraqui Street. Manion speculated that it was an underground source that contaminated the area.

The City of Kingston received Manion's data in April 2008, and took action to hamper the runoff, according to environmental projects manager Brodie Richmond.

Richmond said the city immediately "erected temporary erosion barriers" and did a comprehensive survey of the site while evaluating long-term solutions.

"The runoff from the roof is the material that allows the erosion to be carried away, so when the water was just coming off the roof in a sheet flow it was hitting the ground and scraping exposed sediments off the top of the ground," Richmond explained.

The city then installed two large concrete curbs, or berms, and a trough to divert the runoff from the roof.

It also "dug out over 65 tonnes of the contaminated soils, replaced it with clean soil and revegetated" the area of Emma Martin Park, Richmond said.

"This has been known now for a couple of years and the city took action right away," Reimer explained, "so it's kind of old news and they've done a good job of cutting off that pathway."

Campbell wrote in an e-mail that a follow-up study she conducted with Rutter in 2008 found a lower concentration of mercury present in the area.

Reimer said that his group has now mapped the locations and concentrations of the harbour's contaminants.

"For the first time in the history of the Cataraqui River, we now have a complete understanding of both the distribution of contaminants and what effect they're having and where they're not having an effect as well," he said.

Reimer also believes that all sources for that contamination have been contained.

"I'm not worried about mercury," Reimer said.

"I do think the river needs remediation, but I think it needs it from the fact that there is a collection of different contaminants.

"Only a portion of the river needs remediation because it's only at the very highest concentration (where) the contiminants are, if you like, unsticking themselves from the sediment particles and then getting into the wildlife."



phendra@thewhig.com
Article ID# 2496381

