---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20091026/"
title: "__Whig20091026"

---

##300 years of naval history
By GREG CURTIS



This weekend marks the 70th anniversary of the Kingston naval reserve division, Her Majesty's Canadian Ship (HMCS) Cataraqui. Current and former members will celebrate the unit's anniversary with a series of events, including a reunion meet-and-greet, a change of command ceremony, a formal dinner and a freedom of the city parade.

But Kingston's connections to the navy go back even further than 1939. In fact, our city can claim more than 300 years of naval history. It may even be argued that Kingston would not exist if it weren't for the navy.

After French explorer René Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle, completed the building of Fort Frontenac in 1673, he oversaw the construction of four sailing vessels to assist in the lucrative French fur market.

By 1789, after the town had been established as a refugee settlement for United Empire Loyalists, the British recognized its value as a strategic port, despite its remote wilderness location and its population of only a few hundred residents. Work soon began on the development of Point Frederick as a Royal Navy dockyard -- the only one in the world built on a body of fresh water. Between 1792 and 1806, four gunboats and three schooners were built and launched.

The War of 1812 had a major effect on the town. Domination of the water held the key to victory, and Kingston became the operational base of the Royal Great Lakes fleet. Dockyard facilities were improved and several stone buildings were erected, including a stone warehouse, known as the Stone Frigate, that still exists today. Shipbuilding was stepped up to counter the efforts of the American fleet, which was based at Sackett's Harbor, New York. The U. S. saw the capture of Kingston as its primary objective.

The first ship laid down was the sloop of war, HMS Sir George Prevost, and was followed by 10 vessels of varying sizes as both sides sought to outbuild the other in order to gain command of the lake.

The climax of this construction program came in September of 1814, when the British launched HMS St. Lawrence. At 191 feet long and 52 feet wide, the three-decker was twice the size of the heavy American frigate Constitution and 36% larger than HM Victory, Vice Admiral Horatio Nelson's flagship at Trafalgar. The St. Lawrence carried 112 guns and a crew of 700.

Although the British attacked the Americans on two occasions, Kingston never came under siege. Yet fears of invasion prompted the British to construct the Rideau Canal between 1813 and 1832 to provide a safe logistical link from Montreal to the dockyard. Also around this time, a series of Martello towers were constructed to augment the harbour defences.

After the Rush-Bagot Treaty of 1817, which prohibited armed vessels on the lakes, the usefulness of the dockyard diminished, and it finally closed in 1853.

The St. Lawrence was decommissioned in 1815, and its hull was subsequently used as a warehouse by Morton's Brewery. In 1832, the once-proud ship was sold for a mere £25, and eventually it sank offshore. Resting at a depth of 30 feet, it is now a popular attraction for scuba divers.

When the Second World War was declared in 1939, a naval division was established in an old feed mill on the waterfront at Princess Street where the Holiday Inn now stands. Two years later, the division was commissioned as HMCS Cataraqui.

At the same time, the British Admiralty found itself with an urgent need for patrol and escort vessels that could be constructed rapidly and in large numbers. The Kingston Shipbuilding Company -- located where the Marine Museum of the Great Lakes now stands -- constructed several vessels to support the conflict.

The flower-class corvette (also referred to as the "gladiolus class, so named because those of the Royal Navy were named after flowers) was a class of 267 corvettes used by the Allied navies as anti-submarine convoy escorts during the Battle of the Atlantic. But they had not been designed for such. The seaworthy and highly manoeuvrable corvettes were originally intended for offshore patrol work, but living conditions for voyages on the open sea were appalling. Each between 925 and 1,105 tons, the corvettes were 205 to 208 feet in length and 33 feet in width, with a speed of 16 knots and a range of 3,500 nautical miles.

The majority of these corvettes served with the Royal Navy and the Royal Canadian Navy, with some being built for or transferred to other Allied navies. By war's end, 33 had been lost (22 to submarines). The only corvette still in existence today is HMCS Sackville, which is berthed as a museum in Halifax, N. S.

The corvettes built here in Kingston and commissioned between 1941 and 1944 included: HMCS Napanee, HMCS Prescott, HMCS Sudbury, HMCS Charlottetown (torpedoed and sunk Sept. 11, 1942 by a German U-boat while escorting a convoy in the St. Lawrence River north of Cap Chat, with nine crew members killed), HMCS Frontenac, HMCS Trentonian (torpedoed and sunk Feb. 22, 1945 off Falmouth, with six crew lost), HMCS Peterborough, HMCS Belleville and HMCS Smiths Falls.

Many of the sailors who joined the navy through HMCS Cataraqui sailed on these very ships, and many careers have been launched from its hallowed corridors.

Since HMCS Cataraqui's inception, it has occupied a few other sites around the city: the Kingston Badminton Club, originally built as a school in 1873, at 47 Wellington St. (1943-59); the former training wing of Royal Military College's Sir Archibald Macdonnell Athletic Centre, now part of the Kingston Military Community Sports Centre (1959-72); and the Kingston Armoury on Montreal Street (1972-92). Today, the local naval reserve is set on the banks of the Cataraqui River, its home since 1992.

The naval reserve has the task of providing the necessary personnel to operate the Kingston class of maritime coastal defence vessels located in Halifax, N. S., and Esquimalt, B. C. Other tasks include providing port security units, naval control of shipping units, and maintaining the port inspection diving teams.

Naval reserve headquarters, located in Quebec City, where many of HMCS Cataraqui's sailors have studied, co-ordinates the activities of Canada's 24 units, including HMCS Cataraqui.

The mission of HMCS Cataraqui is to contribute to the mission and tasks of the navy by attracting, inspiring and providing educated, highly motivated and skilled sailors, and to serve the local community by providing a meaningful presence in Kingston and the surrounding area.

The celebrations for the local naval reserve will also be a kickoff to the 2010 centennial year of Canada's navy. More than 100,000 men and women will celebrate this milestone -- 100 years of adventure, 100 years of ships, and 100 years of people. The sailors of HMCS Cataraqui encourage everyone in the region to help us celebrate, and to salute the men and women who have served the Canadian navy so proudly over the past century.

HMCS Cataraqui is also seeking donations of memorabilia to add to its historic displays being planned for this exciting year. The ship's company would be grateful to receive any material related to Canada's naval history lovingly preserved by former sailors and their families. Such items would be "on loan" for the duration of the centennial year. Interested parties should contact Lieutenant (Navy) Stephanie Bélanger at cat2010@forces. gc.ca.

Sub-Lieutenant Greg Curtis serves in HMCS Cataraqui.



Article ID# 2144797

