---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20090826/"
title: "__Whig20090826"

---

##Safety gear on the move
By ROB TRIPP




In the wake of a heartbreaking double drowning last year on the Kingston lakefront, the city has erected lifesaving equipment and signs at parks and public swimming spots -- but it's already rethinking some of the installations.

At Lemoine Point, an orange lifesaving ring and rope hang from a steel post below a sign.

The sign warns that swimming is unsupervised and cautions that "strong winds and high waves cause dangerous conditions."

The sign and ring, however, are located roughly 100 metres from the waterfront, next to the gravel access road at the north end of the conservation area.

When seconds count during a drowning, precious time would be lost if a rescuer had to run back to the road from the waterfront to retrieve the ring.

"We do realize that some of these locations -- not all, some -- may be a little bit further away from the waterfront, and actually considering that we have buoys, not necessarily the most practical," said Lanie Hurdle, the city's director of recreation and lei -sure.

Hurdle said the signs were erected based on the idea of putting them where they would come to the attention of the largest number of people visiting parks and waterfront spots.

The plan looked good on paper.

"When you actually get (them) installed, you do realize that there is maybe a bit more of a distance than anticipated and (some of them) may not be the most appropriate location," she said.

She estimated that between 20 and 30 signs and lifesaving rings were installed at locations along the Lake Ontario waterfront.

"I don't know how many are going to be moved," Hurdle said. "We are in the process of looking at the locations, so until we complete the review ... I won't know exactly how many are going to need to be moved."

On Aug. 18 last year, eight-year- old Joshua Venton was swimming at Paterson Park, near the Invista plant on Front Road, with Don Harper, the 67- year-old man he regarded as his "Poppy."

Investigators believe an undertow may have dragged Joshua into deep water where he was swamped by large waves.

Harper died trying to save the child.

Rescuers, including one woman who was an expert swimmer, could not get to the victims quickly enough in the strong surf to bring them to safety.

There were no signs and no lifesaving equipment at Paterson Park, which is a popular swimming hole though it is not maintained by the city as a beach.

The acting regional coroner at the time, Dr. Benoit Bechard, asked the city to install warning signs.

The city agreed to put up signs and install some lifesaving equipment. City hall responded, in part, because of pressure from family of the Paterson Park victims.

Hurdle said two different types of signs were erected. The sign at Paterson Park discourages swimming altogether, although lifesaving equipment was also installed there.

At other locations, such as Lemoine Point, the signs caution that swimming areas are unsupervised.

Experts say that on the day that Joshua and Harper died, strong winds, high waves and the ideal waterfront conditions may have conspired to create a deadly situation that is rare in Kingston.

Most of Kingston's natural shoreline is sheltered and protected by islands and shoals.

Hurdle said moving some of the signs and equipment is a "very minor" matter.



Article ID# 1715702

