---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig2006-9-14/"
title: "__Whig2006-9-14"

---

From The Whig Standard, September 14 2006

<h3>The Great Lake debate</h3>

Steve Ladurantaye
Local News - Thursday, September 14, 2006 @ 07:00

Boaters could be boarding their crafts from their front porches if the St. Lawrence River is allowed to revert to its natural levels for the first time in more than 40 years.

At least, that's one possibility, as a regulatory body, called the [[http://www.ijc.org/en/home/main_accueil.htm International Joint Commission]], decides between competing visions for the St. Lawrence River and Lake Ontario. Should it return the system to a more natural state and appease environmentalists, or maintain tight regulations and keep recreational users and shoreline property owners happy? A period set aside for public consultation ends tomorrow.

The final decision could affect the leisure or livelihoods of thousands of people.

The commission has been regulating levels on the lake and river since the 1960s. Its decisions have been based on data compiled from 1860 to 1954, and the commission has been working for almost 10 years to update its policies.

"We looked for plans that would see everybody better off and nobody worse off and we came very close to that," Steven Renzetti, a Brock University professor who helped develop the proposals, said "The level of possible damages under some of the plans [is] minimal and the benefits are fairly significant."

Most of Lake Ontario's water spills over Niagara Falls from Lake Erie, then makes its way down the St. Lawrence. The [[http://images.google.com/images?ie=UTF-8&q=Moses-Saunders%20Dam&sa=N&tab=wi Moses-Saunders Dam]] near Cornwall regulates how much of that water makes it into the river. If there were no human involvement, levels on the St. Lawrence could fluctuate by as much as six feet in a year.

"Regulation smooths that out," Nick Heisler, a senior adviser to the commission, said "With six feet, you would have a major flood. You use the dam to store water and hold it back in Lake Ontario."

A group of experts from the United States and Canada developed three proposals to manage water levels as it put together a five-year, <a href="http://www.losl.org/reports/finalreport-e.html">$20-million study</a>.

Plan A is the most regimented, and aims to keep water levels consistent through regulation.

Plan B looks to return the river to its "natural regime," while trying to minimize damage to existing uses. Water levels change.

Plan D is modelled on the old system, with some modifications that would alter plans based on forecasts.

(Plan C was dropped from the final report).

(See this [[http://www.losl.org/PDF/report-main-e.pdf 162 page report]])

Heisler said the commission is not bound by the proposals and could choose to blend the concepts.

"The plans are components that could be considered and the commissioners may decide they like most of one, or mix and match," he said.

Robert Street owns a cottage in the Thousand Islands. He said in a letter to the commission that deregulating water levels would damage many properties.

"Many cottagers who cannot use their cottages by mid-September due to low water would have major and permanent property usability problems and their property values would fall," he said.

The Great Sodus Bay Watershed Intermunicipal Committee, based in Lyons New York, warned that Lake Ontario property owners would be devastated by fluctuating water levels.

"While the primary damage will be associated with erosion and flooding of shoreline residential properties, considerable further damage will occur to the recreational boating industry in our area due to high and low water extremes," chairman Bret DeRoo warned.

In Kingston, fluctuating water levels would pose a challenge for marinas and the recreational boating industry that anchors its tourism sector.

"This is very important to us in the city," Edward Leeman, supervisor of facilities for the City of Kingston, said. "From a marina standpoint, we want to maintain a water level and not have it fluctuating. It's very difficult to construct docks when it depends on the rise and the fall of the river."

Barry Jones of the [[http://www.bqrap.ca/partnerships.htm Bay of Quinte Remedial Action Plan Group]] wrote the committee to voice support for the less-regulated Plan B. The group believes more natural patterns would bring back damaged habitat.

"This option would directly support the restoration of natural vegetation communities, coastal wetland functions, and fish and wildlife properties," he said.

With public consultations at an end, Heisler said the commission will now develop a draft plan. This will be presented to the governments of Canada and the United States, an unnecessary but politically savvy step.

"Though we are autonomous, we recognize the scope and implication of changing an order would be substantial," he said, adding that a final decision could be up to a year away.

The study suggests any of the options would be an upgrade from the system in place.

"The study board is confident that each of the three candidate plans performs better than the current operating regime in terms of overall net economic and environmental benefits to interests throughout the system," it states.

<b>Regulating the Waterways</b>

(See this [[http://www.losl.org/PDF/report-main-e.pdf 162 page report]])

1958-D: In place since October 1963, the current water regulation system was designed for the conditions experienced from 1860 to 1954. "It has not performed well under the extreme high and low water supply conditions," a report states.

Plan A: The most regimented, it strives to keep Lake Ontario within as narrow a range of water levels as possible. It provides the "highest overall net economic benefit, the greatest economic benefit for recreational boaters and benefits in terms of shore maintenance." However, it is also considered to have the smallest benefit to the environment.

Plan B: Strives to return the system to a "more" natural regime, with conditions similar to those that existed prior to the St. Lawrence River Hydropower project, while at the same time attempting to minimize damage to present interests. Water levels would fluctuate much more than under Plan A.

Plan D: Increase the economic and environmental benefits of regulation, relative to the existing plan, without big losses to any existing uses.

Note: There was no Plan C in the final report.

