---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20080816/"
title: "__Whig20080816"

---

##It's all in the family for sailor###Junior Boyd sets sights on CORK

By DOUG GRAHAM
<div class="column2">
Preparing to sail off to Nova Scotia for university, Danielle Boyd will go there next month having already made her mark in the Maritimes.

The 18-year-old Boyd, bound for Dalhousie, scored a major success in Halifax last week, capturing the Youth National title in 29er class.

With that accomplishment now on her sailing resume, Boyd will compete at the 39th Canadian Olympic-training Regatta Kingston next week under more relaxed conditions.

The oldest daughter of Florence and Jeff Boyd, a national-calibre sailor for many years, former Olympic coach and America's Cup competitor, Boyd, 18, will crew for Nick Kroeger at CORK after sailing with Dana Archibald of Halifax to win the national youth title last week.

"I'm sailing with an old friend. He is coming in from Australia. We're doing this for fun," Boyd said. "Our first goal is to make the gold fleet. Then we will pick another goal from there."

Boyd has been around CORK since an early age.

Mother Florence would have her and younger sister Rachel in hand at the south ramp at Portsmouth Olympic Harbour to greet their father after a day of 505 sailing.

It was only natural for Danielle and Rachel to join the junior program at Kingston Yacht Club, which is producing a string of top young sailors.

"I did a bunch of regattas with dad on his boat. That was more for fun," Boyd said. "Once I joined the race team [at KYC] I really got into it."

Under the sage advice of her dad, Boyd sailed a Byte for two years. The single-handed dingy with a sail mass of 58 square feet is considered ideal for young sailors who lack the strength to handle a Laser.

"Dad would say, 'If you want to be a better crew you have to be a better skipper,'" Boyd said. "[Sailing Byte] did teach me a lot."

Her father, a mathematics teacher at La Salle Secondary School, is considered one of the premier tactical sailors in Canada.

Danielle recalled on the return trip from Halifax last Wednesday how the journey turned into a sailing lesson on wheels.

"We had a whole tactics lesson between the four girls in the car and my dad," she said.

"It was actually very informative. My sister [Rachael] is just starting in the 29er and it was her second regatta. We looked at all the different tactics, a lot of scenarios on how they might have lost some boats. They learned a lot and it obviously helps me, too."

Boyd has spent her summer sailing and coaching in the junior program at KYC. While on the water the other day with Emily Hill, her sailing crew for next summer, they spotted a 470 sail past. The double-handed dinghy is an Olympic-class boat.

"We kind of looked at each other and said, 'We should sail that boat,' " said Boyd, adding that with her university years coming up, trying to take a run for an Olympic berth in 2012 may be too much of an overload.

"The great thing about sailing is you can do it for a long time. I'm interested in 2012 but, if not, then 2016," Boyd said.

She plans to return from Dalhousie in the spring and together with Hill try to qualify for the Canada Summer Games.

"If we qualify, that will be our focus. We'll see how it all plays out," Boyd said.

''Notebook'':Skippers from the Collins Bay Yacht Club dominated CORK Offshore in the Olson fleet. Bruce Rand,with O'Natural, finished with 10 points in the four-race series to take the title overDave Wilby.In the Olson 30 Great Lakes Championship, Rand was the leader over nine races. Scott Mundle,with Old School, came second and Wilby, sailing O'ffiction, came third. Mundle captured the offshore distance race with clubmate Stephen Yatescoming second. ... Gatineau'sChristine Lavalleewon the Martin 16 title. Kingston'sAudrey Kobayashiwas fifth. ... Other winners wereSimon Gregoirein Laser 28, Bermuda'sTim Pattonin Etchell, Tom Storyin PHRF I,Dan MacHold in PHRF II,Laurel Laddin Silver,Peter Jurynin Ultimate 20 andLarry Votaryin Soling. There were 52 boats in the offshore fleet.

----

''CORK Sails''

WHAT:39th annual Canadian Olympic-training Regatta at Kingston. WHERE:Racing is contested on nine courses on Lake Ontario and the St. Lawrence River. TO DATE:Already completed is CORK Offshore along with the Youth Optimist and the two-day Youthfest. SERIES I:More than 400 sailors are expected for racing that begins today. The 29er and 470 fleets will be sailing for North American championships; Laser and Radials are holding their International Sailing Association Federation Grade 1 races. There are also classes in Byte.

CONTENDER:The five-metre single-handed dinghy will sail its Canadian and world championship at CORK; the international fleet will have qualifying races to determine the gold and silver fleets. Championship racing begins Tuesday. SERIES II:The fast-moving 49ers hold their Canadian championship during the second series. It will also be the North American championship for the Flying Dutchman fleet. Fireball, 505 and F18 will also compete.
</div>
