---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20080806/"
title: "__Whig20080806"

---

<div class="column2">

''OUR OLYMPIANS: Ken Dool''

##SETTING SAIL FOR BEIJINGTenth in a series profiling Kingston's contributions to the Canadian Olympic team.

''Ken Dool'' was talking to students in his daughter Kacey's Grade 8 class about his work as the high performance director for the national sailing team.

The 42-year-old Dool recalled the reaction the kids had when he told them his office was "on the water."

"They thought that was pretty cool," Dool said. "I was thinking about that afterwards and, you know, it is kind of cool. I have my office in here," he said, motioning to a room in the

Canadian Yachting Association office at Portsmouth Olympic Harbour, "and also out on the water."

It's also pretty cool for Dool that the Beijing Olympics will be the fifth Summer Games he has attended as the national sailing team coach.

"I'm just as excited about this one as the first one, for different reasons," Dool said.

"The first one, you don't know what to expect. You hear all kinds of stories and you realize you are a little naive to realizing the kind of pressures that are [at the Olympics]," he said.

"This time around, I'm very confident of what to expect," Dool said.

The sailing team has much bigger numbers this Olympics compared to the Athens Games in 2004 and the Sydney Olympics in 2000. Rather than enforce a criteria that required boats to be in the top 12 countries ranked for each fleet, Canada chose to allow any boats that had met the International Sailing Federation criteria to go to Beijing.

That means Canada will have entries in nine of the 11 classes.

"We do have a really strong team this time around. I would say three legitimate podium-potential teams and then a couple more potential top 10," Dool said.

He said the Tornado crew of Oskar Johansson and Kevin Stittle, Finn sailor Chris Cook and Laser sailor Mike Leigh are the best hopes for medals.

The sailing venue will be up the coast from Beijing in Qingdao, which is located on a major shipping channel. Dool headed to China in the last week of July and some of the sailors have been at Qingdao since early July.

Dool said he expects the much-talked- about weed problem to be "a non factor" by the time the sailing competition begins on Aug. 9.

"The biggest challenge really will be relatively light wind conditions and a fair bit of current," said Dool, who was with the Canadian team for two test events over the last two years. Both were held in August to mirror conditions expected this time around.

Dool likes the fact the sailing is in a separate venue and is over an hour away from Beijing.

"I know for some of the athletes it's a little downer because they are not in Beijing and not part of the whole circus," Dool said.

"I'm excited, though, because from my perspective that gives us the best opportunity to be very focused on what we are there for, which is to perform," he said.

"Once the [sailing] is over, we will take the team to Beijing to participate in the closing ceremonies and have some fun there. Until then, it's all business."

Dool said the funding Canadian athletes are now receiving and the Road to Excellence program have made a big difference for the sailors. It has allowed them to travel to Europe and Australia for competitions, and that has resulted in what he calls "the de-mystifying" of the belief that the European sailors were doing something different.

"Our guys are seeing that they are the same, that they put their pants on the same way as we do and that our athletes are every bit as good," said Dool.

"That takes away the perceived advantage they had.

Dool's first coaching experience at the Olympic Games was in Barcelona in 1992. Atlanta, Sydney and Athens followed, but the thrill has never waned.

"This will be Ian Millar's ninth Olympics. I was laughing at that because it would take me another 16 years before I can get to that number," Dool said. "It's been, like, 'Wow it kind of goes by fast.' "

Dool, who grew up in London and was on the water by age three, sailing on Lake Fanshawe with his father, has been living in Kingston with his family since he moved into the national coaching position.

He said he loves what he does. "I have no intention of doing anything else," Dool said. "I have that one goal out there still to achieve for myself and that's to coach an Olympic gold medallist in sailing.

"That has been the driving motivation for the 18 years I have been doing this."

Even if the gold medal was to materialize at Beijing, Dool says he wouldn't be done.

"I know it would just be a matter of, 'Now can we repeat it?' " he said. "That has to be is one of the biggest things that [measures] how good your program is: Whether you can have a repeatable performance."

There is another reason why sailing retains the attraction he felt in his youth on Lake Fanshawe.

"I like to track it back to when I was three years old and there were pictures of me sailing with my dad. I grew up sailing with him and it just sort of spun from there," Dool said.

"My daughter [Kacey, named after the Kingdom Canada -KC -that adorns sails of Canadian boats] recently has become very keen on sailing. She is in the Kingston Yacht Club junior program and has her own Laser," Dool said.

"She isn't into competitive sailing yet, but seeing her out there is pretty special for me."

----

Ken Dool

SPORT:Sailing.

POSITION:Head coach and high performance director.

CONNECTION TO KINGSTON:Lives in Kingston with his wife and daughter; works out of the Canadian Yachting Association office at Portsmouth Olympic Harbour. OLYMPIC HISTORY:Will be coaching in his fifth Olympic Games, going back to Barcelona in 1992. OLYMPIC WORK:Dool will have boats in 10 classes, sailing from Aug. 9 to 21.

</div>

