---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20070508/"
title: "__Whig20070508"

---

<strong>City mulls fate of rundown building; It could cost $1.5M to make 100-year-old structure habitable</strong>

Jordan Press Whig Standard Staff Writer
Local News - Tuesday, May 08, 2007 @ 00:00

Richard Hyett sees promise in an old building consultants say should be demolished. He can see returning a derelict and "condemned" stone structure - set to turn 100 years old next year - to its original industrial use.

But the longer the city takes to decide what it will do with the building, the more it decays, Hyett said - along with his interest. "I'm giving up on the idea," Hyett, a local businessman, said yesterday after leaving City Hall, where the heritage committee discussed an old Imperial Oil warehouse at North and Wellington streets, behind Rideaucrest Home.

Before Hyett left the meeting, the committee decided to ask city staff to investigate how much it would cost to reinforce the structure. The city will also use some of the $100,000 set aside in the 2007 budget to tighten access to the site.

Despite years of neglect, the building will stay. The committee chairman said the city couldn't demolish a building just because it didn't keep up on maintenance.

"We as a committee can't accept the demolishing of the building because of neglect," Peter Gower said in an interview.

"Kingston has kept very few of its industrial buildings ... a building like this should be kept."

The cost to keep it and make it habitable again could be $1.5 million.

The city still has to figure out what it wants to do with the site. In 2002, a consultant inspected the building and found portions of the floor had collapsed or were on the verge of collapsing.

"This building must be considered a hazard to public safety in its current condition both to anyone who enters and the surrounding parking and pedestrians," consultants from McCormick Rankin Corporation wrote in a 2002 letter to the city. The sentence was capped and bolded.

The consultants noted at the time that "rot or deterioration is wide- spread throughout the entire interior of the building" and parts of the floor were "imminent" to collapse.

The only part of the building that didn't require extensive work were the stone walls that the consultant said were in "above average condition."

At the time, city council buried the building in a list of priority heritage sites. Instead of setting aside money for repairs, the city put hoarding around the site to prevent people from getting inside, said commissioner of corporate services Denis Leger.

In 2005, a property standards officer for the city found vagrants were using this building as shelter. In his report, Paul Carleton wrote that the building was "unsafe and a risk to be left in the condition it is currently in."

Leger said yesterday that there may still be people using the building as a shelter.

When consultants went back and looked at the property in 2004, they concluded it would cost $450,000 for immediate repairs just to keep it up and another $1.05 million over a 10-year period to make it suitable for use as an office building.

In its budget this year, city council set aside $100,000 to investigate options for the site. Originally, staff had asked for the money to demolish the building.

Leger said the $100,000 in the budget won't go far in restoring the old building. About one-tenth of that could be spent on securing the site, said Jamie Brash, facilities supervisor.

Leger said the city hasn't identified any use for the building, but staff will revisit that idea with the proposed Wellington Street extension running in front of the building.

"Demolition of the property is still an option," he told the committee.

Committee member Craig Sims said the one thing Leger hadn't mentioned was the idea of selling the property.

Councillor Bill Glover agreed.

"I think it's very important we keep an open mind to all possibilities," he said at the meeting.

Leger said the city would have to look at the different land uses in the area if it wanted to sell the site. A sale would also depend on the proposal for the building, he said.

"We could sever a bigger portion [of surrounding land] if need be to make it more attractive," Leger said. "There are different suggestions out there.

"In terms of the roof and floor, it might be worse than we think."

Leger said he has had a few inquiries into the building from people - - including Hyett - interested in purchasing the property.

Committee member John Duerkop said one person approached him about buying the building for the stones making up the wall to use them somewhere else.

"The city might have a little gold mine on its hands," he said.

Committee member Bruce Downey said before the city spends any money on rehabilitating the building, it needs direction on what should happen to it.

jpress@thewhig.com

