---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20120207/"
title: "__Whig20120207"

---

##Future of park to be studied
By Paul Schliesmann

Photo: Mary Farrar addresses council last night on the proposed revitalization of Doug Fluhrer Park.

<div class="column2">

Council on Tuesday night approved a two-year visioning process for Douglas R. Fluhrer Park, but that doesn’t mean everyone sees the future of the area the same way.

Whether the park should be beautified and made more accessible to the public isn’t at issue. That was clear by the unanimous vote (though three councillors were missing from the brief 45-minute meeting).

The snag will be whether the section of Wellington Street running beside the park becomes part of a major road extension that will connect all the way to the intersection of John Counter Boulevard and Elliott Avenue.

Some park supporters fear a paved roadway and the accompanying traffic will ruin the ambience of the narrow inner harbour greenspace.

“That whole issue has to be looked at by full council,” said Councillor Rick Downes, whose Cataraqui district is where much of the extension would run.

“The Wellington Street extension will connect Cataraqui with the downtown. The concept of the Wellington Street extension is something I support. It’s not a big debate.”

Downes said the concerns about traffic passing the park area could be “mitigated” by such features as exclusionary lanes for public transit.

He believes repairing the neglected stretch of Wellington between Bay Street and Cataraqui Street has to be happen.

“The whole concept of fixing up that road is important. That’s where there would be agreement,” said Downes.

Fluhrer Park sits in the King’s Town district of councillor Rob Hutchison.

He was pleased to see the motion pass Tuesday night in order to get on with the visioning process.

But he remains an advocate for keeping all motorized vehicles out of the area and only installing bicycle and walking paths.

Hutchison left the comments to Mary Farrar, the head of the newly formed Friends of Kingston Inner Harbour Association.

In her address to council, Farrar listed a number of events that have already taken place in Fluhrer Park — including its first bocce ball tournament last summer — that are meant to introduce Kingstonians to the beauty of the area.

This year, the activities will include plays in the park and a fun with pets day.

She said the area could become a cultural hub with the nearby National Grocers artisans’ collective already operating.

“We have lots of plans to have lots of activities so people realize how great Doug Fluhrer Park is,” said Farrar.

Even the industrial and railway history of the area could be highlighted, she said.

“It’s more than a waterfront park,” said Farrar. “It’s a waterfront heritage trail. It has the waterfront and the heritage. To me, it’s important we establish a waterfront park.”

</div>

pschliesmann@thewhig.com

Article ID# 3464045
