---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20091130/"
title: "__Whig20091130"

---

##East residents still want bridge
By IAN ELLIOT



Among residents of the east end, the question is not if a new bridge should be built over the Cataraqui River -- just where and when.

That sentiment was on display at an open house on the proposed bridge hosted by the city Saturday at La Salle Secondary School.

More than 100 people registered for the session, which was more of a design charrette than a regular public meeting, with design, technical, traffic, cost and even social issues relating to the bridge discussed in a series of small groups led by city staff and consultants.

Councillor Leonore Foster, who represents the east-end district where the bridge would land -- likely in the area around the Gore Road library, although it is early enough in the design phase that all options are still on the table -- noted that residents believe the bridge's time has come.

"There are still some people who say that a bridge isn't necessary, that it only takes a couple of minutes to drive downtown, but the general belief is that a bridge is needed," said Foster. "People think it's overdue."

With respect to the cost, Foster said the price tag has risen from between $32 million to $40 million one study estimated in the 1990s to something like $100 million today.

"We know that cost is going to just keep rising the longer we wait," she said.

The city is undertaking an environmental assessment, a necessary first step to ensure the structure is feasible and to narrow down the potential sites. Saturday's session was part of the public consultation on that.

Council is due to make a decision on whether to proceed with a bridge when the study is complete, tentatively scheduled for April 2010.

Speros Kanellos, the city hall bureaucrat overseeing the project, noted the environmental assessment was a large one, not only owing to the fact it crosses federal, provincial and municipal jurisdictions, but that the area where it will go is part of a UNESCO world heritage site.

That doesn't impose any additional planning strictures on the city, he said, but it does push it towards putting up a bridge more aesthetically pleasing than most.

"People are telling us that the bridge should look nice, that it should blend in with the surrounding landscape," Foster agreed.

"No one wants an eyesore there."

While it is often dismissed as a pet project for east-enders, the bridge was one of the main recommendations in the city's transportation master plan released in July 2004.

It said the need for increasing capacity across the Cataraqui River was "the most important roadway issue" facing the city.

Police, emergency services and even the military endorsed the idea, pointing out the aging LaSalle Causeway has long been over its traffic capacity and it doesn't take much to bottleneck access into and from the city, particularly in summer.

Hwy. 401 is too distant to allow timely response, particularly to the fast-growing population in the south of the district, and the fast-moving traffic presents its own hazards as a commuting route for east-enders.

A third crossing would improve emergency response times and allow other city services, such as bus routes and snow plowing, to be run more efficiently to the east end.

The bridge has been discussed for more than a generation in Kingston but has never made it off the proverbial drawing board owing largely to its cost.

In making it one of his priorities in the current term, Mayor Harvey Rose noted that significant financial support would be needed from Ottawa and Queen's Park if this bridge is to be built, which would likely happen no sooner than 2015.



Article ID# 2198725
