---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20100320/"
title: "__Whig20100320"

---

##Rain cause of sewage discharge
By PETER HENDRA

###Blame it on the rain.

<div class="column2">

Kingston's combined sewage system discharged 118 million litres of sewage -- the equivalent of roughly 47 Olympicsized swimming pools -- into surrounding waterways after a rainstorm on Jan. 25 and 26.

"It rained pretty hard for a couple of hours and that's what caused it," Utilities Kingston president Jim Keech said yesterday.

According to Environment Canada, the 36 millimetres that fell on Jan. 25 was the most rain Kingston has seen on a January day since 1978.

The melting snow was also a contributing factor, Keech said.

"If I recall correctly, when this rain happened, it got rid of most of the snow that we had," he said, "so that added to it."

Keech said that while significant upgrades have been made in recent years -- including a $7.9-million storage tank built in January 2006 beneath Emma Martin Park on Cataraqui Street -- the system is still sometimes overwhelmed.

"It has been a historic problem," he said.

"We're continually working to put improvements in so it doesn't happen as often. Over the years, there have been improvements, but, unfortunately, you go back to January of this year, we had really heavy rainfall and we did end up with the bypasses there."

Keech said that if the January deluge had happened a decade earlier, the discharge would have been "much higher."

A bypass happens when the amount of effluent surpasses the capacity of the system. The excess is allowed to discharge directly into the river instead of backing up into homes and businesses.

The historical totals on Utilities Kingston's website report that 314 million litres of sewage were bypassed in 2009, 626 million litres in 2008 and 85 million in 2007.

This year, that total is already above 118 million.

"Unfortunately," Keech said, "we've had a bad start to this year."

</div>

Article ID# 2500361
