---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20080922/"
title: "__Whig20080922"

---

##Rideau proposal concerns city councillor###Foster hopes motion to halt development won't impact third crossing

By JORDAN PRESS



An east-end councillor says she hopes a proposal to halt development along the Rideau Canal for up to a year to come up with planning policies for the World Heritage Site isn't a backdoor way to prevent a crossing from being built in the future.

"That was my first thought - whether this was a first salvo against a third crossing in this area," said Councillor Leonore Foster, who has pushed for a new crossing of the Cataraqui River.

"I hope that's not the case."

Foster said there is no need for further studies and guidelines because any crossing could not be a blight on the historic waterway. Parks Canada and the city would make sure of that, she said.

"Any bridge would have to be a beautiful bridge," Foster said.

City councillors will revisit the proposal to halt development next month. If approved, it would put a pause on development along Kingston's portion of the Rideau Canal from the LaSalle Causeway to the northern boundary of the city long enough for consultants and planning staff to develop guidelines for the area.

The proposal prompted some developers to publicly tell politicians to shoot down the proposal because there were enough checks in place to ensure new developments don't destroy the feel of the canal.

"We just don't feel it's necessary. There are enough controls in place with city staff that we don't need anything else," said Barry Smith from Taggart Investments.

The proposal, embedded in a motion from Councillor Vicki Schmolka, was on the council agenda last week, but councillors voted to adjourn their meeting before completing the agenda. The motion will now go on the agenda for the Oct. 7 council meeting.

The debate centres around whether to create an interim control bylaw for the Rideau Canal system in Kingston. An interim control bylaw is a planning tool that allows a municipality to halt development in an area while the city comes up with planning guidelines for that region.

"I'm not happy with the proposal," Foster said. "Pittsburgh for years - even before we joined the city and before it became a World Heritage Site - was conserving the Rideau because it is an area that is of benefit for everybody."

Foster said the planning guidelines currently require developments to be set back 30 metres from the river, a measure Parks Canada was always content with.

"I really don't understand where this direction has come from or why this motion has come forward," Foster said.

Developer Jack Drynan told council that putting the interim control bylaw in place "would be an infringement on [the] rights of landowners." Those landowners, he said, are part of the canal.

"It is the people and the homes that compliment the heritage [value] and should be well thought of " before making a decision, Drynan told councillors last week.

There are enough control measures in place to ensure bad developments don't hurt the canal, Drynan said.

"My advice is, don't mess with something that doesn't need fixing."

That was the message Smith and Margaret Zakos from Axion Developments put in a letter to the city, delivered Sept. 15.

The letter notes that creating an interim control bylaw would be a lengthy and costly process, one that could be avoided by using existing rules and bylaws and possibly adopting any regulatory policies from UNESCO.

Zakos did not return a phone call last week for comment.

Smith's company has just started into the planning and development process for two properties it owns along the canal. Smith said the company wants to build residential properties far enough from the canal so that anyone on the waterway can't see the buildings.

Before getting the OK to build, Smith said, Taggart Investments will have to complete heritage and environmental impact statements. Those documents, along with the proposal, will have to gain approval from the city's planning department and go to Parks Canada for input.

"We're going to be very careful, and if we're not very careful, city staff will make sure we are," Smith said.


<hr>
Article ID# 1210816
Original: http://kingstonwhigstandard.com/ArticleDisplay.aspx?e=1210816

