---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20071005/"
title: "__Whig20071005"

---

##Meet the city's biggest 'fire hydrant'
<h3> Refitted Coast Guard ship is the first rescue vessel local boat-builders have sold in Canada</h3>
By Jordan Press

<div class="sidebar">
<strong>See worthy</strong>

The Kingston fire department's new boat will be on display along with about a dozen others today from 1 to 4 p.m. at [[MetalCraft Marine]] on Wellington Street just north of the OHIP building.

Besides the fire boat demonstrations, there will also be boat rides, tours, and the first boat ever built by [[MetalCraft Marine|MetalCraft]]. There will also be one of the oldest aluminum-hull boats in the world on display, which was built by engineers at Royal Military College in partnership with Alcan.

The Phoebe will be on display next to the drydock where she was built in 1914. Friends of the Phoebe will be on hand to give a history of the steam-launch ship and a specially-designed platform will give people a chance to see the inside of the historic ship.
</div>
Decked out in their work clothes, four firefighters leaned over the rail of the [[http://www.metalcraftmarine.com/html/drydock.html Davis Drydock]] and stared like children inspecting a new toy.

Anchored in the waters by Kingston boat-builder [[MetalCraft Marine]] was the city's most expensive fire fighter.

"This thing is a floating fire hydrant," said fire Chief Harold Tulk before adding: "a very big fire hydrant."

At 12.5 metres long and 4.3 metres wide, and weighing at more than 13.5 tonnes, is Marine One - the temporary name for the department's newest fire boat.

After months of work, the old Coast Guard boat is in the water and being tested to ensure it still works, although the fire chief is certain it will.

"We're going to put it through its paces to make sure it will do everything, but we're confident it will," Tulk said as workers made final preparations to the boat.

Yesterday, workers fired up the three engines on the boat - one to propel the twin diesel engines, two others to handle the water cannons - and began spraying a smooth flow of water.

It will be commissioned next spring, but will be on display from 1 to 4 p.m. today as part of [[MetalCraft Marine|MetalCraft]]'s 20th anniversary open house at its home on the Wellington Street extension, just north of the OHIP building.

Marine One is the first boat [[MetalCraft Marine|MetalCraft]] has sold to a Canadian city. The second is in production and will be shipped out soon to the fire department in Victoria, B.C.

[[MetalCraft Marine]] has been building fire rescue boats at the Davis Drydock since 1987 when it gave up on building aluminum-hulled yachts for the field of fire rescue boats.

The company has gone through downsizing, nearly being booted from its property on Wellington Street during the debate over the location of the downtown arena, to now being among the biggest fire rescue boat builders in the world.

Advertisement

The company's boats float in the waters around Miami, Jacksonville, Seattle, Hampton, Va., and Seward, Alaska. One being built at the moment at the site is bound for the United Arab Emirates, yet none had been built for a Canadian city.

That changed in late 2005 when Tulk asked [[MetalCraft Marine|MetalCraft]] for some help in refitting the now 25-year-old boat known as a Bittern, formerly of the Canadian Coast Guard. The fire chief snagged the boat that was being decommissioned after years of service at no cost the municipality.

"Obviously we're not in the boat-building business. If it was a fire truck, I could tell you what to do," said assistant chief Randy Moore. "I might be biased, but I think it's a pretty good looking outfit."

There was also interest from [[MetalCraft Marine|MetalCraft]]. Refitting the boat could open up a new area of business as more of these Coast Guard boats are decommissioned and given to cities. The refit costs less than a new boat, which can be upwards of $700,000, and can be an option for departments with limited budgets.

"If we could do three or four of those a year, it would be a good line of business," said [[MetalCraft Marine|MetalCraft]] president Tom Wroe.

The renovations cost more than the original boat did.

Tulk negotiated for years with the federal government to acquire the boat for free, and then the department spent $500,000 to refit it with the latest technology.

Tulk said the refit was within budget, although it has taken a little longer than expected.

Tulk said the boat, when it finally starts work next spring, will be a big boost to the department and is not the same boat it was two years ago.

"It's totally different," Tulk said. "This boat is truly a floating water supply unit."

It will allow firefighters not only to douse flames on the water, but also fight fires on waterfront properties by pumping more than 3,000 gallons per second through three nozzles on the ship - two on the bow and one on top of the cabin.

The boat will also be able to supply water to two trucks on land in the event that firefighters need access to water near the lake or river, Tulk said. Although it's not a rescue boat, firefighters will be able to help in water rescues from the 1.2-metre dive platform that has been added to the rear of the boat.

"This is a good step for Kingston," he said.

The annual operating costs for the department will amount to about $30,000 a year for fuel and maintenance, Tulk said. That's an increase from the department's current boat, which costs the city about $10,000 a year to operate.

Tulk said the boat should last for the next 20 years and will be updated as technology changes.

The boat will be available for calls at any hour of the day and any day of the year and will call Portsmouth Olympic Harbour its home.

But what to call the boat? For now, it will be Marine One until a more suitable name can be found.

Moore said the department wanted something to commemorate the history of boat building at the Davis Drydock.

"I wanted something unique to Kingston," he said.

Moore said the department may ask its own firefighters for names, or go to the public for submissions.

Today, the public will get its first look at Marine One and can begin thinking about what to name the ship.

jpress@thewhig.com

