---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20081104/"
title: "__Whig20081104"

---

##Group floats expansion plans by city###City would pay $5,000 a year in membership fees

By JORDAN PRESS



An organization of cruise industry representatives, supporters and cities has approached Kingston about becoming a port of call for cruise ships on the Great Lakes.

The Great Lakes Cruising Coalition is hoping the city will officially join the group and begin welcoming ships by next summer.

"Every cruise ship we bring into the Great Lakes has to sail past our door," said executive

director Stephen Burnett, who runs the binational organization from Kingston.

Burnett said the group has recognized Kingston as a place for expansion.

"We're going ahead. It just would be nice to formalize something with the city," he said.

The organization is nearing a decade of operations and has members that include Detroit, Duluth, Minn., Cleveland, the State of Michigan, Toronto, Windsor, Sault Ste. Marie and Little Current, a small community on the northeastern shore of Manitoulin Island.

"It's always surprising Kingston hasn't been in the mix," said Bruce O'Hare, who is involved with the cruising coalition in Little Current.

Cruise ships on the Great Lakes are smaller than their big-sea sisters. They hold fewer people - up to 300 or so - and can traverse the lakes unlike the larger "blue water fleet" cruise ships that are too big to navigate the St. Lawrence Seaway locks.

The impetus for the organization's invitation is that in 2009, one of the cruise companies will launch a new ship and is interested in coming to Kingston.

About two months ago, Burnett approached the city with the proposal.

"Our perspective is that Kingston is a very attractive port-in-waiting and once the cruise industry is aware that Kingston is open for business, they will consider stopping their ships at your designated mooring location," he wrote in a letter to the city dated Sept. 4.

"Until Kingston actually joins the coalition, we are promoting the city in an informal but effective way."

Continued After Advertisement Below

Advertisement

If Kingston joins the group, it would cost the city $5,000 a year in membership fees. O'Hare said if the small community of about 1,500 in Little Current can find the money, Kingston should have no problem paying the membership fee.

Kingston would earn about $600 per night in docking fees, according to a city hall staff report. The cruise companies would also be responsible for covering the costs of any federally mandated security the city needed to provide.

"The requirements to become a Great Lakes cruise port are quite basic and undemanding," city staff write.

City staff write in their report that Burnett and the Ministry of Transportation had talked about using the Wolfe Island Ferry terminal as a docking location, but the two sides couldn't work out an agreement.

If the city were to take part in the cruise program, Crawford Wharf, at the north end of Confederation Basin, has been identified as a temporary place for the ships to dock.

"[Crawford Wharf] would probably do for a short while. The ships we bring in can just fit onto the wharf," Burnett said. "In the longer-term, the city or some entity in the city should look at a longer mooring wall."

He suggested the Marine Museum of the Great Lakes as one location where a small cruise ship could easily dock.

Another temporary docking location could be Richardson Dock, at the foot of Queen Street, but the required improvements could cost up to $10,000, the staff report notes.

While the city could have costs, proponents say cruise ships docking in Kingston will have an impact on the city's economy by buying goods from local merchants.

"Cruisers will purchase well-priced, excellent quality, locally made handicraft and artwork, if it is available, fairly priced and reputable," city staff write. "The image of hordes descending into tourist traps to buy T-shirts and bracelets is not typical of high quality small-ship cruising."

City staff also note that cruising can also help in revitalizing waterfronts. That was the case at Little Current, O'Hare said.

"We've attracted millions of dollars in waterfront development that I'm convinced would never have happened without the cruise ships," O'Hare said.

O'Hare said Kingston could likely receive government funding to work on its waterfront if it welcomed cruise ships.

The staff report is available online at www.cityofkingston.ca/pdf/council/agenda/2008/A22_InfoRpt.pdf



<hr>
Article ID# 1279104

