---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20090622/"
title: "__Whig20090622"

---

##Diving into the past
By JORDAN PRESS

<div class="column2">
They may look like just a set of timbers lying on the floor of Lake Ontario, but to Mike Hill and other local divers, they are the first pieces of a puzzle that will slowly come together this year and possibly be solved by 2010.

Volunteer divers will once again be in the water today, weather permitting, to continue underwater archeological work started last week to identify a wreck known to the local diving community as Guenter's Wreck.

Hill, president of the local group Preserve Our Wrecks, said volunteers now have a better sense of the task at hand in identifying the possible War of 1812 shipwreck that sits in 15 metres of water near Cedar Island.

"This is not going to be the work of one season," Hill said on the weekend. "It very much is a jigsaw puzzle."

The British Royal Navy didn't leave name plates on its ships, but did leave detailed design drawings about the boats it launched. By taking measurements, photographs and making sketches of the wreck -- information that will be fed into a computer program that will rebuild the ship digitally -- it's hoped that researchers at Parks Canada will be able to identify Guenter's Wreck and end years of speculation about its identity.

"We're a long way from that. The wreck ... is anything but intact," Hill said.

The ship is believed to be from the War of 1812 and part of the dive work will be to confirm that.

The years of speculation as to its true identity have led some to claim it isHMS Montreal,whose final resting place has never been identified. Researchers at Parks Canada have cautioned that the wreck, which they have investigated since 2002, is similar in size to at least three different ships from the period, making a firm identification impossible without further work.

"We really have to gather evidence from the site before we can state anything about identity," said Jonathan Moore, an underwater archeologist with Parks Canada who is working on the Kingston project. "It may be at the end of the day we're about making a statement of probable identity. ... We'll see where the archeology takes us."

About 30 people have volunteered with Preserve Our Wrecks to dive on the underwater remains this summer to help with the investigation. They come from all over -- including Montreal and Toronto -- though many are Canadian Forces personnel based in Kingston, Hill said.

Divers go down in pairs and spend about an hour below the surface in 10C water before switching shifts with another set of divers.

When the divers took their first look at the wreck last week, they found one good piece of news: The riding bitts, two vertical timbers in a boat that were used to hold the anchor (today they are known as Samson posts), were in fairly good condition.

"Their position, if you compare it to plans at the time, can help you in some ways to forming an identity," Hill said.

However, the wreck is not in perfect shape. Hill said the ship looks like it was stripped of parts before it sank to the bottom of the lake and deteriorated further over nearly two centuries underwater.

Moore said the ship's condition is typical of most wrecks from the 1800s. Many ships built in the War of 1812 were idled after the war, fell into disrepair by the 1830s and left abandoned in the lake by the 1840s, Moore said.

Divers won't excavate around the remains or remove zebra mussels from the wreck, Hill said, and will avoid any unnecessary contact.

"Divers are not allowed to stand on the bottom and lever themselves on the wreck. We don't know how fragile it is," he said.

Pictures and video taken during each dive will be used to track further degradation in the coming years, Hill said.

However, the group is also trying to get a sense of how much it has degraded since it was first found some 30 years ago. For that, Preserve Our Wrecks and Parks Canada are hoping to track down the man who found it, Guenter Werntaler.

Hill said Werntaler may be able to provide insight into what the wreck looked like years ago and provide Parks Canada with any research he might have on the ship's identity. That's why part of the project is to track down Werntaler.

"It would be remarkably important," Hill said. "There may well be features of the wreck we are not aware of."

Kingston's waters hold six wrecks that researchers have linked to the War of 1812. To date, Parks Canada has identified three ships: thePrince Regentand Princess Charlottein Deadman's Bay, andHMS St. Lawrence,which was the largest wooden sailing warship on the Great Lakes during the war and carried 102 guns on three decks. She lies just offshore by the J. K. Tett Centre off of King Street.

The dives this summer on Guenter's Wreck is part of Parks Canada's work on War of 1812 wrecks in Kingston. The final information will be made public and used as part of the war's bicentennial celebration in three years.

"Our interest is to better understand these underwater archeological sites ... present them to the public and we're interested in celebrating them," Moore said.

----
''On the Net''

Pictures, updates and information on the research and Preserve Our Wrecks can be found online:

* The Preserve Our Wrecks blog: http://powkingston.blogspot.com

* P. O. W. official site: http://powkingston.org

* Pictures from the group's dives are available on the picture-sharing website Flickr: www.flickr.com/photos/preserveourwrecks/

</div>

Article ID# 1623169
