---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20070613/"
title: "__Whig20070613"

---

<strong>A park with a view</strong>
Editorial - Wednesday, June 13, 2007 Updated @ 6:57:42 AM

Once again, plans are being laid for landscaping a stretch of the downtown waterfront. Last night, members of the public got to look at initial concepts for the lakefront around Block D, the home of new condominiums and a future hotel at the foot of Earl Street and Ontario.

The turnout was small, which is disappointing, because, as the area's councillor, Bill Glover, says, "This is our chance to get it right."

Kingston hasn't always gotten it right. True, a few decades ago, when the Landmark and Harbour Place condominiums were being built, citizens were anxious about safeguarding their access to the waterfront. In the end, the developers were required to leave room for a public walkway around their buildings. They did, but not much else happened. The result is access without romance, a beautiful lake without much to complement it lakeside.

The situation isn't much better around the Holiday Inn or Confederation Place, where tourists might naturally expect to discover a pretty pathway.
Instead, unimaginative sidewalks and the feeling that it's not entirely bucolic late at night accompany pedestrians on much of the city's lake pathways.

This time, with Block D, dare we hope - and demand - much, much more?

Yes, it turns out. First, the city has learned a lot since the early days of lakefront development, when its initial goal was just to get sidewalks behind buildings. Planners have realized Kingston can do better. In the case of Block D, there have been active discussions with the developers about how to invite all Kingstonians, not just condominium residents, to enjoy the vistas along the water's edge.

Second, corporate citizenship is playing a role. Though the city owns about six metres along the water's edge behind Block D, the rest of what may soon be a pleasant green space is private. Since this is the site of the former locomotive works, it is also contaminated land. The city, therefore, doesn't actually want to own it. The compromise arrangement is a city easement of about 40 to 45 metres that allows the public full access and permits municipal government to program and plan activities for the area.

What's under discussion? So far, the drawings show a large gazebo or performance area, concrete walls at seating height near the water's edge, benches, a secondary pathway, lots of grass and some sort of sculpture arrangement to break up what could be a windy location.

The city admits access is somewhat limited: the "gateway" will be off the end of Earl Street, for instance, and sightlines to the water's edge from Ontario Street may not be ideal.

But that's one reason planners are seeking public input now, before the entire mini-park plan is made final. There is an opportunity to get this crucial swatch of downtown right.

As well, developer Britton Smith has shown sensitivity to city concerns. The architecture of the Block D development compliments the city's limestone heritage. Smith has illustrated his personal sense of philanthropy with large donations to a local hospital and to the downtown arena. It shows a willingness to help the city achieve its goals, rather than hinder them.

The key component, however, is public reaction and comment. The plans will be on the city's website today -- www.cityofkingston.ca. You can react. If good-quality access to a downtown waterfront park is part of your Kingston, let the city know how you feel.

