---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20100619/"
title: "__Whig20100619"

---

###Letters to the Kingston Whig Standard Editor

June 19 2010


##More public waterfront access needed
<div class="column2">

Re: "Author pans city over treatment of its shoreline," June 7. It would have been nice if author Ron Brown in his observations had also mentioned that actual access to most of the Kingston / Lake Ontario shoreline is nearly impossible to get to.

It is my experience that now most of our shoreline is in private hands, and it therefore excludes a large segment of our general population to badly needed water access. Even the public's shoreline access, except at Portsmouth Olympic Harbour, is not user friendly for either launching boats (no parking or facilities). It is definitely not friendly for the use of even non-motorized boats like kayaks and canoes.

King Street's long open waterfront is nothing but rocks and boulders since the beach was filled in during one of the Queen's University's building sprees. It is only good to sit on, sunbathe and throw frisbees. Richardson Beach is pebbly and also not very boat friendly, if even allowed. (Improvements are planned for the beach).

This lack of access can be multiplied throughout our province, since many of our inland lakes are virtually inaccessible, mostly, because of private ownership.

Since many of these shorelines of our waterbodies are provincially and/or federally controlled, a Waterfront Access Law should be initiated by our respective governments, so that the ordinary taxpayer has access to his/her own land and enjoy it without running into the problem of trespassing or having to drive miles and miles around.

The planning of where and how many locations, reserving and, later on, the building of these water accesses should definitely occur when our Crown lands are sold off.

This Waterfront Access Law should be initiated and so allow local communities the building of public launches, improve and/or preserve beaches and built facilities, etc. The shoreline length of the acquired land through the Waterfront Access Law shoreline can easily be determined and measured and then preserved, say between 1% and 5% of its length and in some instances possibly more.

More and proper public waterfront access will, I am sure, increase tourism and family outings, activities which in turn will spin off healthier and a less stressed population.

</div>

Wim de Vries
Picton

