---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20081023/"
title: "__Whig20081023"

---

##City vies to get in the Games###Kingston makes bid to host sailing competition for 2015 Pan Am event

By MIKE KOREEN



Kingston is making a pitch to be the host city for the sailing events in Toronto's bid for the 2015 Pan American Games.

Kingston Economic Development Corporation sport tourism manager Gary Kelly has submitted a letter to the Pan Am bid group to pitch Portsmouth Olympic Harbour as the venue for the sailing competition at the multi-sport games.

"The bid committee is going to get together and look at what sites want to host what things," Kelly said yesterday. "It's more or less a Golden Horseshoe bid. Whether we can get sailing or not, I'm not sure, but we definitely have the facilities to host it."

Kingston has experience hosting major sailing events. The city welcomed sailors from around the world for the competition at the 1976 Montreal Olympics. For 30 years, the Canadian Olympic-training Regatta Kingston (CORK) has been the premier fresh-water regatta in the world, typically hosting numerous national and North American championships.

The Canadian Yachting Association, the national sport-governing body, is headquartered at Portsmouth.

Pan Am Games secretariat Liz Borowiec said a dozen Ontario communities have expressed interest in being part of the bid. Bid chair David Peterson, the former Ontario premier, and bid president-COO Jagoda Pike are expected to finalize venues for all sports before submitting the official bid in April.

The Pan American Sports Organization will vote on the 2015 host for the event - which will involve athletes from 42 countries in the Americas and the Caribbean - next summer or fall. Bogota, Colombia, and Lima, Peru, are competing against Toronto for the event.

While Kingston falls outside the Golden Horseshoe, Kelly believes the sailing facility's readiness could make it attractive to bid organizers. He expects to contact Pike again in the next few months to see whether Kingston has made any progress.

"It would bring in tourism dollars and we could add it to the growing list of events we are hosting here," Kelly said. "It also gives people an opportunity to volunteer at a big event."

The federal and provincial governments have committed money to support the event. Premier Dalton McGuinty was part of a group that endorsed Toronto's bid to the Pan Am Sports Organization at a meeting this month in Mexico.



Article ID# 1260520

