---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20081127/"
title: "__Whig20081127"

---

##Lafarge loses appeal###scraps tire-burning plan
By JENNIFER PRITCHETT

<div class="column2">

Lafarge yesterday lost its legal battle at the Ontario Court of Appeal to stop an independent hearing from scrutinizing a controversial proposal to burn tires at its plant west of Kingston.

The defeat means that the cement producer will scrap its plans to burn tires as fuel.

"It's a very disappointing decision for us ... fundamentally it means that the project is done," said Rob Cumming, spokesman for Lafarge and manager of its alternative fuel project.

He said the company now has to move forward with other projects in an attempt to make plant operations more environmentally sound.

Lafarge hasn't heard the last from those environmental groups and citizens who had asked for the independent hearing nearly two years ago.

Over that time, they've spent hundreds of thousands of dollars preparing for a hearing that now will never happen.

Rick Lindgren, a lawyer for the Canadian Environmental Law Association -which represents Tragically Hip front-man Gord Downie and Lake Ontario Waterkeeper - said the groups are planning to go after Lafarge for costs.

"The groups incurred a fairly sizeable bill preparing evidence, generating witness statements and otherwise getting ready for this hearing," he said.

"It was Lafarge's last-minute decision to walk away from the hearing that basically caused those expenditures to be wasted, for lack of a better word."

In order to recoup those costs, the various appellant groups will be seeking a motion through the Environmental Review Tribunal to order Lafarge to pay the costs that were thrown away.

The appellant groups were upset to learn last July that Lafarge had announced it wouldn't pursue the tire-burning proposal if it had to go to a hearing.

The hearing was scheduled to begin at the end of September and was expected to go on for about two months.

In terms of the actual court decision to deny Lafarge's appeal to quash the hearing, Lindgren said his clients are thrilled.

"Our clients are relieved that the court battle is over and more importantly, that the environmental battle also appears to be over," he said.

Lindgren said the Court of Appeal decision is good news for others who want to appeal to the Environmental Review Tribunal about environmental matters.

"In my view, it will greatly facilitate other groups and other individuals in other environmental battles across Ontario, where they want to take ill-advised approvals up to the Environmental Review Tribunal," he said.

The Environmental Review Tribunal is an independent body that can hold impartial hearings into environmental approvals and decisions made in Ontario.

"This is a very important precedent in terms of access to environmental justice," Lindgren said.

Marlene Cashin, lawyer with Eco-Justice, which represents the Bath citizens group Loyalist Environmental Coalition, said her clients are very pleased with the outcome and will join other appellants to try to recoup the costs that have been incurred.

"For my clients, it's great to have this thing that has been hanging over their heads over the past five years resolved," she said.
</div>

Article ID# 1317997

