---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20080723/"
title: "__Whig20080723"

---

##Swimmers head back to the beach
###Young and old take the plunge as organizers look to revive Richardson

By Jane Switzer, Kingston Whig Standard


On a rocky shoreline usually reserved for games of Frisbee and lakeside walks, an unusual sound could be heard last night from the shores of Lake Ontario: Splashing.

I was one of dozens of people who took the plunge into the lake as part of a mass swim organized by Kingston residents Jamie Linton and David McDonald to raise awareness for the improvements being made to Richardson Beach, Richardson Beach bathhouse and MacDonald Park.

From those who only ventured in knee-deep to those who swam well out into the lake, I couldn't help but overhear people of all ages reminiscing about their memories of Richardson Beach.

Mark Fluhrer, director of Culture and Recreation for the City of Kingston remembers what a vibrant and lively destination Richardson Beach used to be.

"In the 1970s, there was a supervised beach area and the usage was high during those times," he said.

I've yet to witness anyone going for a dip by Richardson Beach in the two years I've lived in Kingston, but those people may soon return. The beach is about to get a facelift.

Preliminary plans include an improved water-entry area lined with pea-stone gravel to make access easier for swimmers, bike racks, a ramp to the bathhouse and additional lookout points and pathways.

Fluhrer said because the plans are still preliminary, an estimated cost has not yet been established for the entire project, but the water-entry project will cost about $30,000.

Other swimmers I met at Richardson Beach remember, too.

Jerry Wyatt told me he's still an enthusiastic swimmer at 82 years old and can recall the days when Richardson Beach had a lifeguard.

"I don't go in regularly, but my wife and I live downtown, so we're within walking distance," he said. "We've mostly been swimming at the yacht club because the water hasn't been so good."

Wyatt said he plans to utilize the beach once the improvements are completed.

"I'd love to use it more," he said. "I love swimming."

Although McDonald has only known Richardson Beach for the 10 years he's lived in Kingston, he said he has a special interest in the project. In 2005, he wrote an opinion piece for The Whig-Standard calling for better access to public water, from which he received many responses.

"I made a presentation to a committee and council and then it just sort of died," he said. "I think it got superceded by other major projects like the [downtown arena]."

When he heard that plans to restore Richardson Beach were in the works, McDonald got involved to make sure the public was aware of the project.

"We wanted to keep the heat up and generate interest in this and put the pressure on the city to make sure they do something about it and invest a reasonable amount of money."

McDonald said he looks forward to seeing the natural beauty of Lake Ontario's shoreline enhanced.

"We need to get beyond this notion of beaches as white, sandy places with palm trees," he said. "We need to see the natural beauty we have to offer, which is deep, clean water and waves to play in."

McDonald said he encourages fellow Kingston residents to engage with the lake and ask questions rather than turning their backs on it.

"It's a nice issue because it ties a lot of things together about public space and resources, as well as activity and recreation," he said.

"If you can just convey the significance of these things, it's really what's motivating our action on this front."

Because plans for the beach are still in the preliminary stages, a timeline has yet to be established for the project's completion, giving me more than enough time for me to work on my backstroke.

Residents can offer their comments on the project before Aug. 15 at http://cityofkingston.ca/richardsonbeach.


