---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20090509/"
title: "__Whig20090509"

---

##City should withdraw support for 'sordid' Poker Run###Letter to the Editor, May 9 2009



SPLASH (Sustainable Practices Leave a Sustainable Heritage) could not agree more with Norman Macintosh ("Get serious about going green and cancel the poker run," May 4). The Poker Run does not reflect the city's repeated assertion that it wants to be "Canada's most sustainable city."

In October 2008, members of SPLASH met with the managing director of Downtown Kingston BIA to better understand the relationship the Poker Run has with the city. It was explained to us that the Poker Run is like a convention, to which participants come and use our resources, just like any other gathering of people. At present, Downtown Kingston takes responsibility for onshore activities, such as the hot rod and vintage car displays, the sponsor booths, and, in 2008, the museum display in City Hall.

The only real expense for Downtown Kingston relating to the Poker Run stems from a small local ad campaign. Downtown Kingston says that its role is to promote events that will draw people into the downtown core, and not to judge what events should be supported.

It is interesting that the only references to "the environment" in Downtown Kingston's outdated strategic plan (from 2001) relate to cosmetic issues and not sustainability. There are also no references to any social justice issues. While this may be in keeping with the Municipal Act, does it reflect the concerns and needs of residents of Kingston?

When concerns about this event have been raised with individual city councillors, SPLASH has had some strong support. However, others have asked such questions as, "Well, what about the Snowbirds?" SPLASH views this as a blatant attempt to abdicate responsibility by lumping all events together. Should we ignore one environmentally harmful event because it means soon we might have to question other events?

Supporters of the Poker Run bring up its economic impact. According to Downtown Kingston and Poker Run associates, this event brings tens of thousands of people downtown. Undoubtedly some people do come downtown for this event, and some boaters and their entourages stay in Kingston that weekend. However, this event is on a peak summer weekend, so to state that all those people are here as a result of the Poker Run is nonsense.

We have suggested four alternative events to Downtown Kingston that could increase the number of people visiting Kingston and also engage more residents. We see this as a win-win situation.

While Downtown Kingston and the City of Kingston would like to make it seem like this event is not their responsibility, there are ways the Poker Run can be discouraged. If the city denied the request to close Ontario Street and Downtown Kingston stopped promoting this sordid event, perhaps they could focus more on events that would benefit our community.

For more information, please contact SPLASH at SplashKingston@yahoo.ca


Name Withheld
Kingston

