---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20090312/"
title: "__Whig20090312"

---

##Let's get a clear picture of city marina operations


Why do the municipal marinas claim to operate at a loss? How can this be when rates charged to boaters are comparable to those charged at other municipal marinas that record profits? How can this be when fees are virtually identical to those charged at Collins Bay marina, which has been able to grow and thrive?

These questions have long puzzled boaters at the municipal marinas. The Kingston Municipal Boater Association (KMMBA) investigated this issue some years ago. The situation was explained by two circumstances.

First, there is a failure to separate marina and non-marina functions in financial reporting, especially in relation to the building at Portsmouth Olympic Harbour. Commercial "marina" operations should be solely about providing facilities and services for boats and boaters. Unfortunately, financial reporting practices at Kingston's municipal marinas have not recognized this reality, and financial accounts often include activities that are not related to marina functions. This has generated misinformation, caused confusion and mistrust among boaters, marina managers and the public at large, and is counter-productive to producing good marina management policies.

With regard to the building at Portsmouth Olympic Harbour, antique shows, flower shows, ski swaps and other events that use the sail room there are important community happenings but have nothing to do with marina operations. That an insufficient number of these events are scheduled annually to allow the building to cover expenses is not a marina problem. The financial results of these activities should not be lumped in with marina operations.

While the Portsmouth Olympic Harbour building is mandated to operate as a commercial business entity, this does not prevent managers and elected officials from allowing community groups to use these facilities at prices managers deem to be suitable. However, the consequences of these decisions should not impact the financial performance of the commercial marinas.

Second, costs and revenues are not accurately attributed in financial reports. When the KMMBA compared costs reported at Kingston marinas with costs at other municipal marinas, it was evident that Kingston costs were high. When Kingston's costs were presented to managers at other municipal marinas, they were unable to suggest plausible business reasons for the high costs and could only express surprise and bewilderment at the high level of reported costs. This characteristic continues to show up in the current marinas report. For example, labour costs in 2007 at the municipal marinas are reported to be $527,315. It is difficult to appreciate that all that labour time is spent on Kingston marina operations.

Attribution issues also arise on the revenue side of the balance sheet. Since the Portsmouth Olympic Harbour building is mandated to operate as a commercial business entity, tenants should pay market rents. City administrative staff occupy a large amount of floor space. However, rent is not paid to the marina account for this space. While this represents an internal paper transfer, failure to respect such accounting practices produces distortions in the resulting financial picture. Rental costs for city administration are the responsibility of taxpayers in general, not the marinas.

A central recommendation of the marinas study now under consideration is that the marinas operate as commercial businesses, with each marina reporting as a profit centre. Implementation of this recommendation, which would require accurate recording of true "marina" revenues and costs, would demonstrate that on a fiscal basis alone, they are profit centres that generate surpluses that are available for other municipal purposes.

Jim Cannon
Kingston




