---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20090917/"
title: "__Whig20090917"

---

## Revised master plan gets mixed reaction
By MIKE NORRIS




A revised master plan for the revitalization of Lake Ontario Park was greeted with mixed reviews at a public meeting at Loyalist Collegiate and Vocational Institute last night.

Lanie Hurdle, the City of Kingston's director of recreation and leisure services, was kept busy during the two-hour-plus meeting attended by about 200 people.

"I think it went fairly well," said Hurdle, who was peppered with questions about the revised plan for the 8.9-hectare park during the evening.

"There seemed to be a lot of support for most of the elements in the plan and a lot of suggestions for improvements."

The revisions, which came about as the result of public input since the last plan was unveiled in June, include:

* the removal of a natural pond that would have been used as a natural skating rink in the winter

* a re-created wetland is gone, replaced with a natural wetland

* an exit onto King Street has been replaced with a looping, two-way road so that vehicles can leave the park the same way they entered

* a heritage arbouretum has been replaced by an existing forest

"We looked at the comments we received since the last concept," said Hurdle. "We had a lot of written comments, phone calls, e-mails. We looked at the many concerns."

Those concerns included the pond (because of its cost and location), traffic exiting onto King Street and the estimated cost of $4.3 million.

Among the features of the June concept the public was in favour of were the beach, the children's play area, a picnic area, preserving and adding trees and accessible pathways within the park.

The revised plan will also reduce construction costs to $4.1 million and cut operating costs by $20,000 per year.

One of the elements that rankled several audience members was the lack of recreational vehicle/ camping sites, which will number between five and 10.

"You're going to lose the TOMM Fest (a music festival) and the agility (dog) trials," said David Morgan. "You need a bigger site. You're going to lose that business."

Some people want to see a bigger splash pad for children to play in ("it will bring back the kids and their families," said one gentleman), while some were concerned that the 110 parking spots weren't enough. Others were disappointed that the removal of the pond means no winter skating, although the park will be open year-round.

"I'm disappointed there won't be winter activities," said Holly Dine. "I would be pleased to see as many activities as possible in the park."

For the most part, however, the public was satisfied with the revised plan.

"Everybody seems to be working together," said Tony Dowling. "We need to take our time, and there's no need to rush, to do things right."

Elements that remain in the master plan, developed by consultants Peter J. Smith and Company Inc., include:

* open lawn play areas that can also host programs and events

* picnic area with grills and picnic tables

* an overlook fishing platform

* pavilion with washrooms, showers, concessions, bike, skate and ski rentals

* environmental-themed water play area for children

* naturalized amphitheatre with stage area

* swimming area

* lake house with washrooms, showers, change rooms, canoe/ kayak rentals and storage

Two park features not included in the master plan are a "daily camping site" or an "off leash dog area." The consultant's findings concluded that a daily camping site would consume 40% of available park space and off-leash areas are not typically found in a premier park, as is proposed. Some camping would be allowed during and only for special events.

Construction would be phased in over three years. Parts of the park will become off-limits to the public while they are under construction and cars may also be restricted to the site so construction can take place safely. The entire park, however, will not be closed to the public, according to the city.

Written submissions, e-mails and comments will be considered by the Arts, Recreation and Community Policies Committee at their Sept. 24 meeting. If the committee recommends the plan to council in October and council approves it, construction could begin in the fall of 2010.


