---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20080624/"
title: "__Whig20080624"

---

##Kingston's changing skyline
(Letter to the editior, Tuesday June 24 2008)

I used to notice the striking similarities between Kingston and Annapolis, Maryland, where I did my undergraduate studies at St. John's College. Both are historic cities bordered by a river that opens out onto a larger body of water. Both skylines are peppered with domes and spires. Both have institutions of higher learning, including a large military college. Annapolis is the capital of Maryland, while Kingston was briefly the capital of Upper Canada.

On a recent visit back to my alma mater, I was greeted by a very scenic approach to Annapolis unencumbered by strip development and enhanced by attractive plantings along the roadways. Everywhere, I saw signs of beautification and restoration of historic buildings. These were done in good taste, as the new blended with the old so as not to draw attention to itself.

We left Annapolis by a different route that crossed over the Severn River. Going up the hill beyond, I was again reminded of how similar that view is to the one from Barriefield across the Cataraqui River to Kingston. But in Annapolis, no building rises higher than the dome of the U. S. Naval Academy's chapel or the spire of Maryland's capital building.

What stands out in Annapolis is how the vista of its historic sites has been retained by capping the height of new structures and by keeping the esthetic overview first and foremost in mind. Sadly, in my opinion, Kingston has lost the chance it had to be an historic centre of exceptional quality. Local government mismanagement and lack of imagination have won the day over enlightened respect for the past and vision for the future. Balanced proportion and scale have been sacrificed to developers' greed.

On a final, more positive note, I still live in hope of more public access to our beautiful waterfront for all to enjoy, of a greater effort to preserve what green spaces we still have at our city's periphery for farming and recreational use, and for city planning that encourages more pedestrian, bicycle and public transportation.

Julia du Prey
Kingston
