---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20090520/"
title: "__Whig20090520"

---

###Study proves to be no day at the beach
By IAN ELLIOT

<div class="column2">

The search for a downtown swimming area will be expanded beyond Richardson Beach.

For the past four years, city staff have been looking at restoring Richardson, at the bottom of Barrie Street near Murney Tower, to something approaching its past glory as a genteel swimming spot.

After a $60,000 technical study, city staff now are against the creation of an improved beach at that site and are suggesting Breakwater Park, along King Street East between the hospital heating plant and the PUC water filtration plant at the foot of Beverly Street, should be studied instead -- but Richardson might be turned into what staff call a "natural" swimming area.

The proposal for Richardson involved installing 18-metre-long barriers, known as groynes, that would surround the area like a pair of huge commas and reduce waves and erosion. After studying the idea, however, consultants said the groynes would present a safety hazard, result in poor water quality in the swimming area and would be an eyesore.

In addition, constructing the two wave barriers, also necessary to keep the pea gravel from washing away, would cost about $300,000.

"City staff have determined that Richardson Beach is not a preferred location for a calmer beach area," a report from sustainability commissioner Cynthia Beach that went to council last night stated, citing the problems identified by the consultants and the cost of the project.

Instead, city staff are looking at the western corner of Breakwater Park, near the utility plant, as the preferred site to build an all-ages swimming beach.

One of the proponents of the Richardson Beach swimming area, David McDonald, said that was fine with him.

"I never liked the option of the groynes," said McDonald.

"I thought they were very ugly and they presented a number of safety problems, but they would have been the only way to prevent the gravel from being washed away."

A windsurfer, McDonald is familiar with Breakwater Park and says the water there is flat and the western corner of the land, bordered by Lookout Point and Stony Point, could be turned into a family swimming area at much less cost and with a more pleasing result.

However, he was insistent that Richardson, and its neglected beach house, not be overlooked by the city, regardless of what they do to the adjacent park.

The beach house, which has change rooms and washrooms, is in dire need of roof repairs and landscaping.

He says in conversations with city staff, they have talked about repairing the structure and possibly hiring a summer student to pick out the rocks that gather near the waterline, which make going into the water there a potentially hazardous experience.

The lake bed itself is smooth limestone, but he says if the city could regularly clear the stones that the current pushes to the shoreline and fix up the beach house, it would make it a very usable site to take a summer dip.

"What we don't want to see is Richardson abandoned," he said.

"It's a beautiful building, and we think that area could still be used for swimming in the summer."

As the recommendation to further study Breakwater Park did not come with a cost, city council was expected to approve the staff motion last night.

</div>

Article ID# 1574520

