---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20100823/"
title: "__Whig20100823"

---

##Marine museum a valuable asset
<div class="column2">

The Marine Museum of the Great Lakes is a great institution. Whatever the problems of the moment, they should be seen in perspective.

First, on the subject of money. Over its more than 30 years of operation, the museum has attracted many millions of dollars from the public, government, foundations and private corporations. When you compare the necessary financial support from the city over the years compared to what the museum has brought in, there has been a considerable net gain to our community. It is the operating support from the city that has enabled the museum to attract support from other sources, without exaggeration, millions of dollars, most spent locally. The museum has put much more money into the community than it has received. That money has been used to maintain the buildings, provide public programming, develop exhibits, cover the cost of utilities and insurance, preserve the collections and pay a dedicated and talented staff. The museum has hit hard times financially, but that is no reason to give up on a fine institution.

In the early 1980s, the trustees took on the difficult job of waterfront urban regeneration. The historic shipyard buildings were in decay. The four buildings were renovated, restored and opened to the public. When done, the board was lauded for its leadership and contribution to the community -- one of a number of pioneers in Kingston's waterfront development. A few years later, and after the necessary vetting, the Canadian Government declared the stone Engine House and Dry Dock a National Historic Site. Like building blocks, other improvements followed. The museum was a part of the support system lobbying for the waterfront walk, the Navy Park on Ontario Street, the last deep-water dock close to the downtown core and other civic amenities. The credit for these public assets go to others, but the museum was in there helping the cause.

Giving access to the collections through exhibits and research holdings is what the museum is about. The museum has what is called a vertically integrated collection, meaning one part of the collection supports the others. There are 12,000 catalogued books, 3,000 artifacts, more than 2,500 boxes of archives, more than 40,000 ships drawings and more than 15,000 paintings, drawings and photographs. Many of these collections have been designated Canadian Cultural Property. Visitors from most parts of the world, scholars and students representing many disciplines, family historians and authors have viewed, interacted with and studied the collections.

This museum is not just about boats. Social history and technology are the dominant themes and that leads to a broader understanding of the Great Lakes and what got us to where we are now. The museum has fine collections of art. There are more than 300 portraits of serving Second World War Canadian Navy men and women. The best document of its kind in Canada in this, the Navy's centennial year. Most museums in Canada are far more expansive in their content than their official names suggest.

As for museum people, we tend to be optimists. We do not live in the past. We study the past because we believe in the future. What museums collect has utility and that leads to understanding.

</div>

Maurice D. Smith Curator Emeritus
Marine Museum of the Great Lakes at Kingston
