---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20100709/"
title: "__Whig20100709"

---

##A wave of debt
By TYLER BALL




After collecting and preserving artifacts for more than 30 years, the Marine Museum of the Great Lakes is in financial trouble.

After nine months of construction on its dry dock -- which prevented it from collecting revenue from the adjacent parking lot -- the museum lost another major revenue source when it had to close its bed-and-breakfast operation aboard the Alexander Henry museum ship when friable asbestos was discovered on it.

"The proceeds of the bed-and-breakfast help fund our core operations," said Mark Siemons, chair of the museum's board of trustees. "We lost tens and tens of thousands of dollars."

Siemons said it will be at least next season before the ship can open again.

In addition, the museum has seen a 50% drop in attendance revenue so far this year, possibly due to the dry dock construction, lack of visitor parking and the construction on Ontario Street.

As a result, the museum is facing a $65,000 operating loss at year end and is asking for the city's support.

"Because of the suddenness of it ..., I don't know how we'd be able to raise that much money that quickly without the help of the city," he said.

Siemons and the museum staff are aiming to have a proposal on the agenda of the July 20 city council meeting.

"Our staff have been meeting with city staff to figure out how we'd be able to do that," he said.

Meanwhile, the museum will receive long-term funding from the federal government for the national historic site that it sits on.

"The big-picture stuff is going really well," Siemons said. "We just ran into this glitch right away."

In addition to the money sought from the city, the museum is looking at reductions in staff, operating hours and services to researchers and schools.

"The city is a longtime supporter of the museum. It's been a pretty successful partnership over the years," Siemons said.

"We would hope that they could see a way to help us."



Source: http://kingstonwhigstandard.com/ArticleDisplay.aspx?archive=true&e=2661004

Article ID# 2661004
