---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20091016/"
title: "__Whig20091016"

---

##Work could begin as early as this year
By IAN ELLIOT

<div class="column2">

The federal government is moving ahead with a project to rebuild the drydock at the Marine Museum of the Great Lakes.

The work could begin this year, now that the government has put out a tender to stabilize the structure and restore the extension of the King Street West museum's drydock, built in 1929, to its original configuration.

The drydock extension has been plagued with safety issues over the years and the work, which will cost between $2 million and $5 million, will provide a more solid home for the retired Coast Guard vessel, Sir Alexander Henry.

"The whole intent is to increase the public safety of the drydock," said Ann Blake, executive director of the museum.

She noted that the problems with the drydock have been known for some time but it has taken years to get the project to the point where it is ready to proceed.

Contractors interested in the work, which will involve new walls and a slab floor for the drydock as well as new pumps and wells, will visit next week to evaluate the site.

Blake hopes work will begin later this year and be finished when the museum moves into its high season next summer.

The museum has long been at the centre of an infrastructure battle between the city and the federal government, a stalemate that did nothing to speed repairs of the drydock.

The city had expressed interest in acquiring the museum and federal land it sits on, but Ottawa had long insisted if the city wanted the museum, it also had to take the aging and mechanically unreliable LaSalle Causeway. The city wanted nothing to do with that structure, even for the $1 selling price.

While a number of engineers' reports identified deficiencies with the drydock, the question of who would repair it became the main issue between the city and the federal government. The feds said it was the city's responsibility, while the city said it was Ottawa's.

Ottawa agreed to pay for the work in 2007, around the time it signed a new lease with the museum, keeping it as the tenant of the land.

"Although we have divergent opinions regarding the covenants in the current lease to upkeep the property ... we can agree that the property now requires rehabilitation," Tim McGrath, an assistant deputy minister with Public Works and Government Services Canada wrote the city in 2007.

In an unrelated announcement earlier this year, the Ottawa announced it would spend $40 million to upgrade several aging bridges that it owned, including the 90-year-old lift-bridge across the Cataraqui River.

</div>
Article ID# 2132792

