---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20081002/"
title: "__Whig20081002"

---

##Diesel spill leaves islanders without water###Agencies called in to assess damage after 700 litres of fuel discharged into Lake Ontario

By JENNIFER PRITCHETT

<div class="column2">

Island residents who live along a two-kilometre stretch of the St. Lawrence River have been advised not to drink the water from their shore wells because of a diesel spill yesterday from a boat linked to the island's wind-power project.

The tugboat, operated by Nadro Marine Services Ltd. of Port Dover, Ont., was sitting at the island's winter ferry dock near Dawson Point, just east of the main ferry dock, when as much as 700 litres of diesel fuel spilled into the surrounding waters.

Nadro Marine is contracted by Canadian Hydro Developers Inc. to haul barges daily from Ogdensburg, N. Y., carrying the project's 86 giant turbines - one per load. The turbines, 28 of which have already arrived, are to be erected on the island in the coming months.

After the spill yesterday, Canadian Hydro delivered bottled water to residents who live in the affected area.

"An investigation of this spill is being conducted to determine the cause ... and to identify any changes that should be implemented to help ensure that such events are avoided in the future," read a statement from Canadian Hydro.

The water along the shoreline near the winter dock was covered in a colourful sheen of diesel fuel yesterday afternoon.

The Canadian Coast Guard, Ministry of the Environment and Environment Canada have all been summoned to assess the spill and the environmental damage. A public health inspector from Kingston's district health unit was also dispatched to the island to speak with residents about their well water.

Wolfe Island doesn't have a municipal water and sewer system and many residents rely on wells that are located along the shoreline for household water and drinking water.

The letter advised residents that "the fuel may contaminate your shore well and it is advised that you not drink water from your shore well until such time as the Ministry of the Environment concludes it is safe."

About seven families live in the affected area.

The Coast Guard's search and rescue station in Kingston was the first agency on the scene around 9:30 a. m. yesterday. The crew deployed a containment boom near the winter dock in an effort to contain the spill. Some of the fuel, however, had already migrated west about two kilometres along the shore.

Janet Twining, a senior response officer who travelled to Kingston from the Coast Guard's environmental response group in Prescott, said absorbent pads were deployed in the water to capture the diesel fuel that wasn't contained within the boom.

"[The sorbent] likes oil and it doesn't like water," she said.

Yesterday afternoon, a handful of the sorbent pads were floating in the water. Several of them were stained as they absorbed the pollution.

Twining said there hadn't been any obvious signs of impact to wildlife.

The Coast Guard was called to begin the cleanup of the spill because the pollution originated from a ship, which falls under federal jurisdiction.

The Coast Guard will return to the scene again today to monitor the cleanup.

"We're still the government representative making sure the response goes properly, so we'll be back to monitor to make sure everything gets done," Twining said.

Canadian Hydro has hired Eastern Canada Response Corporation to continue the clean-up of the spill.

Personnel from the environmental company arrived at the scene in the afternoon and have since taken over managing the containment and cleanup efforts.

Jerry Doyle, the contractor who oversees safety issues for the Wolfe Island project, said the spill occurred as the diesel was being transferred into a tank on board the tugboat and ended up spilling out through the bilge.

Michel Finn, spokesman for the Ministry of the Environment, said the Kingston office sent personnel to the scene to assess the damage and to ensure that residents were notified of any impact to their shore wells.

The ministry also notified downstream communities, including Gananoque and Brockville, of the spill.

Wolfe Island is located on a major bird migration corridor and Mark Mattson of Lake Ontario Waterkeeper is concerned about what impact the spill may have on birds and fish in the area.

"This [wind-power] project is hardly off the ground and this has taken place," he said. "I'm really hopeful that the Ministry of the Environment takes it seriously. They have a number of pieces of legislation to use."
</div>

Article ID# 1228874
