---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20090718/"
title: "__Whig20090718"

---

##Kingston's MetalCraft a top sell for fire boats
###BOATBUILDER: Local firm constructs $3.5-million vessel for a Florida fire department

By GLORIA ER-CHUA

<div class="column2">

Does size matter?

"If you want a lot of pumping capacity, it does," says Jay Milner, showing off a 21-metre vessel parked at Kingston Marina.

The large fire boat, which Metal Craft Marine has spent the past year building, has four water pumps.

Milner, the project manager, said the $3.5-million craft is the largest the local company has built to date.

Three weeks from now, Metal- Craft will spend about four days doing final tests on the water before the boat is sent to Florida, where it will be used by Tampa Fire Rescue.

Prior to winning the contract to build the boat last May, MetalCraft had built about 70 fire boats that were sent to U. S. fire departments. The biggest of the bunch were 15 metres in length.

"We did five 50-footers in a row," he said.

The Tampa fire boat has a medical room with a medical fridge, a bunk area, a galley and a crane.

By the time the vessel is finished, it will have taken about a year to construct with 14 people working on the project, Milner added.

"It was quite a challenge because of the size, to begin with," he said. "Also the complexities of the electronics that are on it, which are high-end."

When Tampa Fire Rescue began looking for a fire boat, MetalCraft was one of the first companies that came up, assistant chief Scott Ehlers said.

The Tampa department had heard that Miami-Dade Fire Rescue had recently commissioned a 50-foot fire boat from Metal- Craft.

"We went down there to see it as well as to go out on it," Ehlers said. "(Miami-Dade) showed us the capabilities of it and we were thoroughly impressed."

He said the fire department also sent a few bid packages to U. S.-based companies but MetalCraft was the easy choice.

"We found that most U. S. builders that can build a vessel of this size, plus out of aluminum, have built maybe one or two fire boats throughout their lifetime," he said. "MetalCraft had a significant amount more of experience than a lot of the American builders."

Ehlers said the port of Tampa is one of the busiest in the U. S.

"It's also one of the largest in regards to the area we have to patrol and cover," he said. "We needed a vessel that could cover that distance rather quickly but also provide the fire power to take on some of the largest ships we have coming in, such as four cruise liners."

Milner said MetalCraft has another large project lined up once Tampa's boat is completed.

The company will be building a $4.4-million fire boat for Jacksonville Fire and Rescue Department.

"We've got a pretty growing reputation for good quality fire boats," he said. "It sounds a little cocky, but we don't have to sell our boat right now. Our boat sells itself."

</div>

Article ID# 1662090


