---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20100722/"
title: "__Whig20100722"

---

###Fishing hotbed hosts tourney

##CANADIAN OPEN

By DOUG GRAHAM



There is no doubt who the star will be over the next three days at the Canadian Open of Fishing.

It's the abundant fishery on the eastern end of Lake Ontario and into the St. Lawrence River, with its trophy-size largemouth and smallmouth bass.

The acrobatic bronzebacks and the largemouths are the major reason why each pro angler will invest a couple of thousand dollars at the Canadian Open.

Kingston's waters are home to some of the best bass fishing in Ontario.
"It's one of my favourite places for a tournament," said Canadian sport fishing icon Bob Izumi, who is a three-time Canadian Open champion and former Canadian angler of the year.

Izumi, after a few days of pre-fishing along with many other pros who were doing the same thing, declared the waters better than ever.

"My biggest (bass) was four and a half (pounds). I heard guys later on saying they were running into five-plus fish. The smallmouth are all grown up," Izumi said.

"It is going to make for some exciting fishing and weigh-ins."

Izumi is estimating it will be a weight of 65 pounds (a maximum of five bass per day can be weighed in by the pros) that will win the $40,000 first-place prize for the pros.

Even though they will easily be spending $150 to $200 a day in gas to power their bass boats on long treks to favourite holes, along with the $1,000 entry fee and hotel accommodations for a week with the pre-fishing that goes on, the pros didn't hesitate to sign up for the tournament.

When the newly-styled Canadian Open of Fishing was announced back in the spring, it took fewer than three days for tournament registration to max out. The pros are putting up $1,000 each to fish while the amateurs paid $600 for the right to be in the bass boat of a different pro each day.

The amateurs are going for a prize collection valued at over $50,000. Plus, the amateur anglers get to fish out of the same bass boats with some of the top names of the sport.

Confederation Park is the blastoff site for the bass boats in the early morning and also the spot for the weigh-ins in the late afternoon.

Besides the giant stage complete with a digital weigh scale to display each angler's daily catch, Confederation Park will also be decked out with displays by sponsors like Shimano Canada, GLoomis, Power Pro Line, Lund Boats and Mercury Marine.

The draws and giveaways, which go with the weigh-in show, will include fishing gear and merchandise and the chance for free home siding by Mitten Vinyl.

Andrew Pallotta, in charge of all tournament rulings as one of the Canadian Sport Fishing League officials on hand, said the daily bass weigh-in shows are popular events for spectators.

"Kingston's always a great place for a tournament," said Pallotta who estimates 2,000 spectators will take in the weigh-in shows.

The pros come in daily at 3 o'- clock to weigh-in their bass, all of which must by a minimum of 13 inches. Once weighed the bass will be returned to the water via the Shimano live-release pontoon boat.

Helping out with that process will be several marine biology students from Queen's University.

The anglers take great care to bring in their fish in top shape, transporting them in a mandatory aerated live-well each bass boat is equipped with. There is a one-pound weight deduction penalty for any fish the biologists deem can't be returned live to the water.

The unique side to the Canadian Open of Fishing is that it is also being utilized as a fundraising for Soldier On, an organization that assists injured or ill Canadian Forces personnel.

"I can't think of a more worthy cause than supporting our Canadian troops," Tom Brooke of Shimano Canada said in an earlier release on the tournament.

"The best way we as competitive anglers can do that is through a truly Canadian heritage activity like sport fishing."

- - -

Canadian Open ofFishing

What: A three-day bass anglers tournament involving 80 pros going for $100,000 in prize money.

When: Thursday to Saturday.

Where: Confederation Park, in front of City Hall, is home base for a tournament that will help raise money for the Soldier On program.

The Bass-ics: Largemouth and smallmouth bass are the only fish the pros are going for. An angler can bring in a maximum of five fish per day.

Live-release angle: The anglers can use only artificial bait and all the bass caught will be live-released after the weigh-in. A dead fish is a one-pound penalty.

Blasting off: The pros depart from Confederation in tiers beginning at 7 a.m. daily.

Pound for pound tale: The daily weigh-in shows begin at 3:30 p.m. at Confederation Park.



Article ID# 2679601
