---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20081016/"
title: "__Whig20081016"

---

##Underwater wires connect Kingston, island###$15-million submarine cable will hook wind project into electricity grid

By JENNIFER PRITCHETT


This morning, a team of Norwegian engineers and divers will finish installing the most powerful extension cord in the world.

The 7.3-kilometre-long submarine cable being run along the bottom of Lake Ontario will connect the Wolfe Island wind project to the provincial electricity grid.

It runs from the Invista Canada property on Front Road on the mainland to two concrete vaults called transition structures at the bottom of the Fourth Line on the northwest side of Wolfe Island.

On the windiest day, the Wolfe Island project will generate enough electricity to power 75,000 homes.

Mike Jablonicky, the project's site supervisor, said yesterday afternoon that the ship carrying the giant spool of wire was about 700 metres offshore from the Invista property and will be making its way across Lake Ontario using specialized equipment.

"We've basically determined a route we must follow using GPS co-ordinates and divers," Jablonicky said. "The cable is positioned very precisely. Using sonar, we took a 60-metre-wide path and found the best route from Point A to Point B."

Crews started the process of laying the cable at about 9:30 a. m. yesterday.

They looked for a flat, obstacle-free route across the bottom of the lake.

"There's a lot of wrecks and stone down there, but you look for a nice flat path, one that won't cause any problems for the cable later on," Jablonicky said.

About 40 experts were involved in laying the cable on the bottom of the lake.

"It's actually buried in a channel of up to 10 feet at which point it comes out of the channel and lies right on top of the lake bed," Jablonicky said.

The $15-million submarine cable is a critical part of the infrastructure required for the Wolfe Island wind project, expected to be operational by April 2009.

Calgary-based Canadian Hydro Developers Inc. awarded the contract for the Wolfe Island cable in January 2007 to Nexans, a Norwegian cable company that does installations around the world.

"This was our window of opportunity [to get it installed]," Jablonicky said.

The cable was designed, manufactured and delivered via a special cable-laying barge pulled by a tugboat to Kingston during the Thanksgiving weekend from a plant in Halden, Norway. When it arrived, the ship was docked at Elevator Bay near the Invista plant until yesterday morning.

The cable is about 25 centimetres in diameter and is really three cables wrapped into one with three current-carrying conductors and 32 fibre optic conductors -all wrapped inside a lead sheath.

"It is a very well-protected cable," Jablonicky said.

To connect the submarine cable that was installed this week to the provincial grid, an underground cable will run from the Invista property to the Gardiners Road substation.



Article ID# 1249534

