---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20100106/"
title: "__Whig20100106"

---

## Community rep says Poker Run article not exactly on the mark
I am writing to clarify several misconceptions in an article that appeared in the Jan. 4 edition of the Whig Standard ("Optics are worse than impact: Official.")

Whig Standard reporter Ian Elliot called me on Saturday afternoon with regards to the Poker Run report, which I produced for the Kingston Environmental Advisory Forum (KEAF), and I spent some time on the phone with him.

There are a couple of areas where he did not get it exactly right and I would like to clarify some of those areas now.

To start with, I am not an "official." I am an appointed community representative on KEAF. Nor am I a "retired engineer." I have academic qualifications in geology, civil and geotechnical engineering, environmental impact assessment and law, and I hold (or in some cases have held) professional engineering qualifications in Canada, Hong Kong and the United Kingdom, along with other professional qualifications. I retired from the Hong Kong Environmental Protection Department in 2004 and, since 2005, have allowed my Ontario P. Eng designation to lapse. I still do active management and environmental consulting work for a Kingston-based firm.

In general, the reporter has set out the background and details of my report more or less correctly.

However, the phrase "optics are worse than impact" was not mine. I would have said that the actual impact was less than the perceived problem. I would have also said that perceived problems can be just as important as actual impacts -- there is a good example of that going on with the Wolfe Island wind turbines.

My other issues with his article are largely nitpicking, nonetheless there are several points that I wish I would have made more clearly had I thought I was providing more than mere background.

I think I would have liked to have seen a somewhat wider discussion of the overall sustain-ability question -- that is, the need to weigh up environmental impacts along with social, cultural and economic issues. I would also have stressed that it might be worthwhile to put more emphasis on the conclusions set out in the KEAF consolidated view as attached to the council paper for discussion yesterday. I should also like to note that my report recommendations were not universally accepted at KEAF and there were minority views against mitigating the impacts through the purchase of carbon offsets.

In any event, I am sure that this is not the last time I will get the chance to discuss my report findings on the Poker Run.

Ian Dubin
Kingston
