---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20080403/"
title: "__Whig20080403"

---

##Rosen's record as mayor unparalleled for last 50 years
<p>
When I was out of the country earlier this year, I learned that the Whig Standard had published the results of a quasi-public opinion poll and that Mayor Harvey Rosen had received an approval rating in the 30-per-cent range. As they say in the vernacular: "Hello! You've got to be kidding. Get real buddy!"
<p>
Since Rosen became mayor, he has overseen the following projects:
<p>
A final resolution to the question of what to do about Block D after 40 years. The new condos and apartments will contribute millions in taxes to the city every year.
<p>
A partial resolution to the Marine Museum and dry dock situation and a new wharf to service large tour ships.
<p>
Federal contributions to Fort Henry that, to date, equal $11 million.
<p>
A new police station with a value of $35 million.
<p>
A renovated Ravensview sewage plant and auxiliary storm sewage storage sites; value, $130 million.
<p>
A multiplex complex; value, $35 million.
<p>
The K&P walking and biking trail, including a $1million underpass under all six lanes of Highway 401 at Highway 38; value, $2 million. the Springer Market Square renovation and ice pad; value, $7 million the K-Rock Centre; value, $42 million
<p>
the Grand Theatre renovation; value, $17 million.
<p>
Total: About $280 million. That's right: $280 million in capital spending and only a four-per-cent tax increase for this year.
<p>
Of course, the mayor had assistance. His first council was very supportive of the major projects it adopted. The current council has more of a stewardship approach. Glen Laubenstein, our city's chief administrative officer, and his staff should also be commended for managing these significant projects.
<p>
We were fortunate that Rosen's relationship with our provincial member of Parliament, John Gerretsen, and our federal member, Peter Milliken, helped to bring hundreds of millions into our various civic projects.
<p>
Every team needs a leader, and I will go on record that Rosen's performance as mayor is unparalleled for the last 50 years. My approval rating is 80 per cent.
<p>
<strong>Michael Davies, Kingston</strong>

