---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20120703/"
title: "__Whig20120703"

---

##City aims to shore up swimming situation
By Paul Schliesmann,
Monday, July 2, 2012 11:27:56 EDT PM

<div class="column2">

Public swimming advocate David McDonald says the City of Kingston has produced 36 studies in 30 years concerning its 220 kilometres of navigable shoreline.

Breakwater Park was made for sweltering hot summer days like these.

The cool breeze blowing in from Lake Ontario provides relief from the 30-plus Celsius temperatures.

The 500-metre-long grassy stretch of land, built with the infill from nearby hospital construction in the 1970s, is an ideal place to set out a towel or blanket for sunbathing.

Now, if only it were easier to get into the water.

Well, the city’s working on that with plans for a potential $2-million upgrade that will include creating better swimming areas in the series of small inlets that dot the shoreline.

Much as he likes the idea of public access to Lake Ontario, public swimming advocate David McDonald believes the consultation process for Breakwater Park is paddling in the wrong direction.

He believes more money and work should go into dock along the south side of the park belonging to the city water treatment plant.

That’s where most of the swimmers congregate, he said, lured by the deeper waters and good jumping and diving.

“I’m not saying I’ve got all the ideas for the waterfront,” said McDonald. “I don’t have specific plans or ideas. We need a properly integrated discussion.”

What he’d like the city to do is return to a 1997 Breakwater Park study that proposed building a break wall to create a sheltered beach area and make swimming off the dock safer.

“Maybe this is a good area for sitting on a bench and looking,” he said, “With so much shoreline you can have different locations for different reasons.”

The city’s commissioner of community services agrees Breakwater Park has a lot of potential for swimmers but it’s important to balance needs.

Lanie Hurdle said one of the unknown factors is the physical condition of the dock and whether Utilities Kingston wants to have swimmers using it at all.

“We need to look at the condition of that dock. We know it has been informally used, especially by students. There’s a difference between informal use and doing something formally with it,” she said.

“We appreciate some people may be good swimmers but there are families with young children. You might want to have shallow water as a starting point, and definitely from a safety aspect.”

Council has set aside $250,000 to design for the park, which will likely include widening of the walkway that runs parallel to Ontario Street.

Staff have estimated $2 million in construction costs though, Hurdle said, “it’s not cast in stone.” The final amount would have to be approved in future capital budgets.

“Different people want to have different things and they have different needs. We’ve heard from seniors about the pathways. It’s part of the overall knowledge that, in the end, we won’t be able to make everybody happy,” said Hurdle.

“The design is not complete. There will be another public meeting in August that will provide the public with options based on feedback.”

McDonald said it’s time for a more integrated approach to improving Kingston’s waterfront.

He pointed out that the City of Kingston has produced 36 studies in 30 years concerning its 220 kilometres of navigable shoreline.

“We want to say to the city we want access to the water and we can’t talk about a little 500-metre stretch without talking about the other parts,” said McDonald. “Why not do it properly and, at the same time, create a public asset we can be proud of and enjoy.”

Four years ago, McDonald co-organized a mass swim at Richardson Beach to urge the city to make the waterfront more accessible and restore the bath house with its change rooms.

Mass Swim II will take place on July 11 at 6:30 p.m. at the Utilities Kingston dock at Breakwater Park.

McDonald called the event “symbolic” and organizers will restrict the number of people going into the water for safety reasons.

“The mass part is the people showing up on the grass,” he said.

</div>

paul.schliesmann@sunmedia.ca

