---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20090827/"
title: "__Whig20090827"

---

##'Father of the Laser' honoured
By MIKE KOREEN

<div class="column2">

When Ian Bruce picked up a voicemail instructing him to call the Governor General's office for an important message, his first thought was to simply press delete.

"I wasn't sure whether it was a hoax or some sort of telemarketing," the longtime sailing man, 76, said yesterday at the Canadian Olympic-training Regatta at Kingston.

It's a good thing Bruce decided to follow through with the call back to figure out what was going on.

This was no joke. The man from the GG headquarters was calling in June to tell Bruce he was about to be named an Officer of the Order of Canada.

Known as the Father of the Laser and a big advocate for youth sailing, Bruce was rewarded for coming up with the idea for a boat that is now used in more than 150 countries.

"The man (in the Governor General's office) said, 'I have to ask you a question. Do you accept your nomination?' " said Bruce, whose Montreal-based company, PS2000, now designs many brands of sailboats, including the Bytes on the water for the world championship at CORK this year.

"I just roared with laughter."

When he got over the shock, Bruce simply was overwhelmed that he would be recognized for his role in championing youth sailing. There are now almost 200,000 Laser boats being sailed around the world.

But the way Bruce tells it, it's pretty much a fluke that he got involved in sailing.

Born in Kingston, Jamaica, before moving to Nassau, Bahamas, after the Second World War, Bruce was sent to boarding school in Port Hope at Trinity College by his family as a teenager.

From there, he moved to Montreal to attend McGill University for engineering. While there one summer, Bruce received a call from his good buddy, Bermudaborn, Montreal resident Kirk Cooper, asking for a favour.

Cooper, a sailor, was scheduled to run an International 14 in a nearby regatta.

"He said, 'The crew is sick and can't sail with me. You're from the Islands, you must know how to sail. Ever raced?' " Bruce said.

The answer was no.

"I said, 'Kirk, I'm a hell of a spearfisherman,' " said Bruce, who found sailing "boring" as a kid. "He said, 'That's good enough.' So I went to the Pointe Claire regatta with him and that's the reason I'm sitting here talking to you. It changed my life. I fell head over heels in love with the sport."

Soon after, Kirk and Bruce purchased a boat for more racing. Bruce went to the Olympics as a Canadian sailor in 1960 and 1972 and has been at almost every CORK competition in one capacity or another since its inception in 1969.

It also took Bruce a while to find his calling in the design business. After his first year at McGill, Bruce had a choice to specialize in an engineering discipline or architecture.

The latter appealed to Bruce, but his father persuaded him to focus on engineering.

"The first year, I got straight A's," Bruce said. "The fourth year, I got straight F's. I never finished engineering."

So Bruce went on to land a job at Alcan before returning to university in Syracuse to complete industrial design studies.

With that degree in hand, Bruce came back to Montreal to join an industrial design firm.

Eventually, him and a few partners started their own business in the late 1960s.

"I started building International 14s as a hobby," Bruce said. "All of a sudden, the hobby started consuming me. I decided to give it up unless I could get a boat mass-produced that I could make a living out of."

That boat was the laser. He came up with the concept and discussed it with friend and fellow Canadian Bruce Kirby, who sketched the boat.

The rest is history.

"I was going to build 400 boats and retire," Bruce said.

It didn't quite turn out that way. At its peak, Bruce's company was putting together 12,000 boats in a year.

Laser became an Olympic boat in 1996.

Bruce, meanwhile, still is going strong. He works more than 12 hours a day and still sails when he finds time.

"I don't know how he keeps up," CORK executive director Marianne Davis said. "He is always willing to help and always willing to give advice.

"He is just so passionate about the development of the sport and youth sailing."

</div>

Article ID# 1717524

