---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20100618/"
title: "__Whig20100618"

---

##Sailing into the future
###NATIONAL TEAM: Laser sailor Robert Davis balances his studies with his passion for the sport

By DOUG GRAHAM

<div class="column2">

Robert Davis is halfway through his four-year engineering studies at Queen's University.

The 20-year-old Kingston sailor is also sort of in the middle years of his Laser experience on the Canadian national team.

For Davis, son of former Olympic keelboat sailor Paul Davis, it's all about staying focused in working towards the end goal.

"I have to stay disciplined with sailing just like I have to stay disciplined with my school work," he said.

"It's tough work but I make sure I use my time wisely and keep working hard at both things."

On the water, Davis would love to follow the Olympic path of his father who was a bronze medalist for Norway in the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney one year.

Davis is realistic though, acknowledging that while the academic target will be reached, getting to the Olympics is further off.

"Right now, it is all about development. I'm still learning," said Davis, who heads to Texas Tuesday to compete in the three-day Laser North American championship which begins Thursday on Galveston Bay.

Davis, since university finished in April, has been in a major regatta in the Netherlands -- he finished in the middle of the 97-boat fleet -- and spent three weeks training in Toronto with national team Laser sailors like David Wright (sixth at the worlds) and Lee Parkhill (16th at the worlds).

"I try to learn as much as I can while they push for this year and (for the Olympics in 2012). It would be pretty tough for me to catch up to those guys for 2012," said a realistic Davis.

The Laser veterans on the national team -- Mike Leigh, who is ranked No. 7 in the world, Wright, Parkhill and Chris Dold -- are the ones younger sailors like Davis (ranked 88th) and Luke Ramsay (52nd) are chasing.

Davis said the chance to train in Toronto with the country's top Laser sailors is a terrific opportunity.

"It is good for me because I can learn a lot from those guys. They are definitely still a step above me," Davis said.

"I try to pick up as much as I can and add that to my game so I can try to be as fast as they are around the course."

Over the last two weeks, Davis has been out on Lake Ontario practising with fellow national team member Greg Clunies, who also attends Queen's.

Ken Dool, high performance director for the Canadian Yachting Association -- which is headquartered at the Portsmouth Olympic Harbour -- has been out working with Davis and Clunies.

Murray McCullough, an Ontario Sailing Association coach, also works with Davis and Clunies. Next month, former Australian national coach for the Laser, Erik Stibbe, will be begin working for the CYA and he too will be working with the national Laser team.

"It is nice that Robert is able to go to school here and train here and he can walk to his boat," said Marianne Davis, Robert's mother and also the executive director for Cork Sail Kingston. Davis, who was born in Naersnes, Norway, and was sailing with his parents by age four, rose through the ranks of youth sailing when he arrived in Kingston several years ago. He represented the Kingston Yacht Club at the Youth World sailing championship in 2007.

He sailed a Laser back then and has stuck with the highly popular one-design boat, which is simple to rig. The Laser became an Olympic-class boat in 1996 at the Summer Olympics in Atlanta.

Although his father Paul has expertise in keel boat sailing, twice going to the Olympics, Davis said he is dedicated to the Laser.

"That's the boat of choice for now. I am pretty much the ideal size for it and I'd like to keep going in the class," Davis said.

His summer is certainly packed with sailing events, beginning with next week's Laser North American championship.

While Davis will be going to Texas, his Laser won't because of the travel distance involved.

He will rent a Laser for the North American championship. That is not as much as a handicap as it might seem because the Laser has tight class association controls which eliminate differences in hull, sail and equipment. It is the sailing version of a level playing field for all.

Next month, besides more training camps, Davis will sail in the Laser Canadians in Quebec.

One championship still pending is the Laser Worlds in late August. Davis is first on the waiting list for the championship which is in Hayling Island in Hampshire, G.B.

"There are not many spots left in the championship. I am still hoping but there is not a huge chance," Davis said.

Prior to the world championship he will be in the area, sailing a world cup Laser event Weymouth, the 2012 Olympic sailing venue.

Even if he doesn't squeeze into the world fleet, Davis doubts if he will sail at CORK.

"Mom would maybe like to see me not get a spot for the worlds and I could come back to do CORK," Davis said.

"I'm not sure I will be back even if I don't get to the worlds. There is also a under-21 world championship at the same time (in Great Britain)," he said.

"That would be a pretty tough competition. It would be a better regatta from a development standpoint."

If he does skip the Olympic classes at CORK on Aug. 21-25, Davis will be back in September in time for his third-year classes at Queen's.

He will also have the fall regatta to sail in late September. It too is run as part of CORK Sail Kingston and it will be the qualifying regatta for selection to the national team.

</div>

Article ID# 2628844

Original: http://kingstonwhigstandard.com/ArticleDisplay.aspx?e=2628844
