---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20090115a/"
title: "__Whig20090115a"

---

##Outage causes sewage spill
By JENNIFER PRITCHETT



The city of Kingston purged roughly 10 million litres of partially treated sewage into Lake Ontario on Tuesday night when a lengthy power outage caused equipment to stop working at the Ravensview sewage treatment plant.

Yesterday, Utilities Kingston president Jim Keech said the backup power system for the retrofitted plant wasn't up and running.

"The generators are there and we were hoping that they would have been able to operate [during Tuesday's power outage]," he said.

"Unfortunately, they didn't and we are actually working through that right now with a contractor and a consultant."

The facility's $116-million upgrade is expected to be completed by May or June.

The plant, located off Highway 2 along Lake Ontario, upgraded from basic sewage treatment to the more environmentally friendly secondary treatment process last fall.

It was that secondary process that failed during Tuesday's power outage.

Keech said he wasn't completely surprised the backup generators didn't kick in when the power went out because Utilities Kingston is still in the process of testing the new equipment.

"If this would have been six months from now as opposed to [Tuesday], there would have been practically no impacts on the process," he said.

The sewage bypass started at 3:15 p. m. on Tuesday and til 10:30 p. m.

Utilities Kingston also kept extra staff on duty overnight in case the power went out again.

"All of our water and sewer equipment in the east was affected," Keech said.

"We did what's called a secondary bypass so we still provided primary treatment, but the secondary treatment we just installed wasn't operating. We got the one level of treatment, but not the second."

Hydro One spokeswoman Daniele Gauvin said it was windy conditions that caused the power outage. It took crews a while to complete repairs because it was a fairly main line that was damaged, she said.

"You have to go through every section to identify the problem," she said.

While some customers had their power restored by 8:30 p. m., others were without electricity until 10:30 p. m.

Ravensview was without power until 10:30 p. m.


