---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20090131/"
title: "__Whig20090131"

---

##Developer donates $200,000 to museum###Gift to be used to build docks for cruise ships

Posted By MATTHEW PUDDISTER

<div class="column2">

Local developer Brit Smith of Homestead Land Holdings Ltd. has donated $200,000 to the Marine Museum of the Great Lakes.

The money will go toward building an on-site docking area for cruise ships.

The proposed dock, to be located at the west pier, would be the centrepiece of the Marine Museum's planned bid for federal funding, said Mark Siemons, chair of the museum's board of trustees.

Government money would pay for a general renovation that, it is hoped, will attract more tourist dollars to Kingston.

Siemons said that the Marine Museum's location at a nationally-designated historical site makes it a deserving recipient of federal funds that the Harper government's new budget designated for marine tourism.

"At the budget, $24 million was announced specifically to develop marine tourism," said Siemons. "We believe that with Brit's donation, with this historic site and with the new budget and [money for] marine tourism, that the federal government should be building docking for cruise ships at the site."

Siemons said the west pier is the best spot in the area for cruise ships to dock.

"Brit agrees, and he gave $200,000 towards building docking for the cruise industry right at the site of the Marine Museum."

Siemons said both Mayor Harvey Rosen and Senator Hugh Segal have echoed Smith's support for the new dock.

A federally-owned dry dock is part of the museum site. Siemons said its dilapidated condition necessitates government assistance.

"For docking to occur on the west pier, it will have to be rehabilitated by the feds," he said.

"It's an eyesore on Kingston's waterfront, and I think there's some safety concerns It's eroding, it's falling into the lake [and] it's going to need a lot of work to be safe and secure and sound for public use."

</div>

Article ID# 1413875

