---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20080811/"
title: "__Whig20080811"

---

<div class="column2">
##Area labelled hot spot for ticks###Bugs transmit Lyme disease

by JENNIFER PRITCHETT

Greg Bulte doesn't take chances anymore when it comes to the black-legged ticks that transmit Lyme disease.

Even though he was treated and no longer has any symptoms of the disease he acquired six years ago, Bulte regularly gets his blood tested. A PhD student working at the Queen's University Biological Station, he methodically checks his body for ticks each time he spends time outdoors in areas where there is a known risk for the disease.

"Just to make sure I don't miss anything," said Bulte.

Though he acquired Lyme disease while doing fieldwork in Maryland, a high-risk zone for ticks, his job at the research centre north of Kingston is located in an area where the risk of coming into contact with Lyme Diseasecarrying bugs is on the rise.

The Public Health Agency of Canada has labelled the area around Lake Ontario and the Thousand Islands near Kingston as hot spots for increasing risk of contacting Lyme disease.

Robbin Lindsay, a research scientist with the agency, said the tick population seems to be peppering the area from Kingston to Brockville along the Thousand Islands Parkway.

"On some of the islands in the Thousand Islands area, there are established black-legged tick populations and those populations have the bacteria that cause Lyme disease," he said.

"People are certainly coming into contact at a much higher rate than they have in the past."

Canada's tick population was once limited to one area on the Long Point peninsula on Lake Erie's north shore. Spread by the birds on which they feed, the bugs have spread to areas across the country over the past 15 years.

Those areas include the shores of Lake Erie, around Lake Ontario, the Thousand Islands, Nova Scotia, southeastern Manitoba and southern British Columbia.

In the Kingston area, Lindsay estimates that roughly eight per cent of the ticks people are taking to local public health units carry the Lyme bacteria.

"I would expect over time, as the [tick] populations become more established in those areas, the infection rate will climb and the risk will increase," he said.

In the face of this increasing risk, the Canadian Lyme Disease Foundation laments an almost complete lack of public education about it.

Jim Wilson, president of the foundation, is disappointed with the management of the disease in Canada.

"The attitude of the health authorities is baffling, to say the least," he said.

The association has asked the federal government to set up an independent review panel to look at the incidence of the disease in Canada. So far, that hasn't happened.

A Winnipeg MP has also called for a national strategy to diagnose and treat Lyme disease in response to an increasing threat of the infection across Canada.

Judy Wasylycia-Leis, who is also the NDP health critic, submitted a formal request to Health Minister Tony Clement in June, urging Ottawa to set up a strategy to diagnose, treat, and do better surveillance for Lyme disease.

Bulte agrees there should be more public awareness for citizens and doctors.

He recalls a student who was working at the Queen's research facility two summers ago when she suspected she may have contracted Lyme disease. She went to see a doctor and was told there was no Lyme disease in Canada.

"A couple of days later, the same doctor called her back because he read a newspaper article about Lyme Disease and said, 'We're going to test you after all,' " he recalled.

While the student tested negative for Lyme disease, Bulte said the doctor's ignorance of the disease and the rising risk of contacting it in this area indicates the need for more public education.

When Bulte acquired Lyme disease, he was doing fieldwork in the Jug Bay Wetlands Sanctuary near Chesapeake Bay in Maryland, where knowledge about Lyme disease is much more common than Canada. He considers himself lucky that he was able to detect the infection early, something he credits with his knowledge of the disease and ticks.

Three weeks after he had to remove a tick out of his left shoulder, he recognized the tell-tale bull's-eye rash in the same spot. He'd become ill with flu-like symptoms, including weakness and confusion. He immediately went to a clinic.

After visiting the doctor, he was placed on antibiotics, and two days later, he was back doing fieldwork. He says he has had no lasting effects of Lyme disease.

Generally it has to be treated early for such a positive outcome.

If untreated, in the later stages, the disease can move through a person's tissue, embedding itself in the central nervous system, heart, liver, brain, spleen and joints, causing symptoms including mild pain, dizziness, confusion and paralysis.

It can have devastating effects and can be hard to diagnose which, for some, can result in months of suffering.

Ontario's chief medical officer of health, Dr. Dave Williams, said the province is keeping close watch over the spread of the bug and is taking the the threat of infection seriously.

"Most recently, we've been watching what's been going on in the St. Lawrence - Thousand Islands National Park area," he said.

Across Ontario, there were 38 cases of Lyme disease reported in 2006, 34 in 2006 and 59 in 2007. The majority of those are believed to have been acquired in areas outside the province, such as the northeastern United States, where Lyme disease is more prevalent.

Until last year, there was an annual average of five cases of Lyme disease that were acquired in Ontario. In 2007, that number jumped to 17.

So far in 2008, Kingston, Frontenac Lennox and Addington Public Health has had one reported case of Lyme disease. There were no cases last year.

This year, the Leeds, Grenville and Lanark District Health Unit have had four reported cases of Lyme disease, compared to three in 2007 and four in 2006.

The Ministry of Health is taking a closer look at the general increase cross the province to determine whether it's significant or whether it's the result of enhanced tick surveillance and more vigilance on the public's part.

The province is also encouraging local public health units to raise the public profile of ticks and Lyme disease through awareness campaigns.

The ministry is urging people to submit ticks to their local public health units to be tested for Lyme disease.

"We've been seeing an increase in tick submissions because the people are more aware," said Williams. "The positive rate [for Lyme disease] for those ticks hasn't gone up substantially, but that doesn't mean we're going to be complacent about it."

The ministry hopes that by getting the public to submit the ticks, it will be able to create a database of locations for tick populations.

About 18 months ago, the province created a Vector-borne Disease Unit to help government health officials get a better handle on diseases such as Lyme disease and West Nile Virus.

Dr. Ian Gemmill, medical officer of health for the Kingston area, said public health's role is to monitor reported cases of Lyme disease and to educate physicians and the public about prevention.

"Prevention includes such as things as wearing long clothing, checking oneself for ticks if one doesn't - though they are very tiny and hard to see," he said. "The prevention we can give is to wear long trousers when one is in long grass and in the country where these ticks like to live."

Gemmill said public health doesn't have a dedicated public awareness campaign for Lyme disease, unlike the push to educate the public about West Nile in recent years.

The Kingston area hasn't had a case of West Nile, which is spread through mosquitoes, for about four years.

"We're not as likely to run into this tick as much as we are likely to run into mosquitoes," he said. "Public health in general tended to focus on that because the mosquito exposure is so much more common.

"However, that is not to take away from the importance of Lyme disease."

Gemmill also pointed out that while Lyme disease can be effectively treated with antibiotics if it's caught early, West Nile is a viral disease that has no real treatment.

Still, he urges people to be diligent. Anyone who believes they may have been exposed to ticks is encouraged to go to their family doctor to be tested, he said. Meanwhile, public health is continuing to monitor the situation.

"This is not a disease we see every day, although I have heard that ticks are becoming more common," said Gemmill. "If we do run into a situation where this becomes a great risk and we're observing more transmission to humans, there would be more reason to do more intensive public awareness."

Jim Sutcliffe, a medical entomologist at Trent University, said bird migration has been the source of the ticks moving north into Canada. Global warming is enabling those ticks to survive and reproduce in more northern latitudes.

"The thing that's different is that the climate is changing - it's warming gradually so our summers are getting warmer and our falls are becoming warmer," he said. "The temperatures stay higher for longer throughout the year and that's making southern Canada receptive for the blacklegged tick."

Sutcliffe said the awareness about ticks is entering a new realm as the prevalence of the bugs is spreading to more parts of Canada.
</div>

