---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20110414/"
title: "__Whig20110414"

---

##City: what's up with dock?
By Samantha Butler The Whig Standard



City council will vote at its next meeting Tuesday whether to address the federal government regarding a fence at the former coal dock next to Lake Ontario Park.

Councillor Bill Glover is asking council to direct the mayor to write to Transport Canada, expressing concern about the property in question.

"Whether or not the letter will be sent or what it might say is yet to be determined," Mayor Mark Gerretsen said.

Transport Canada erected a chain-link fence around a small piece of federally owned waterfront property at the end of March, citing public safety concerns.

In response to newspaper inquiries, Transport Canada stated it has no immediate plans to service the coal dock or take down the fence, but it would entertain offers to divest the property from "any interested party."

Glover notes that Kingston has a policy on acquiring waterfront property. Section 3.8.8 of Kings­ton's Official Plan states that the city will acquire waterfront land whenever it becomes available.

"You have to look at it and do your due diligence," Glover said.

"What are the strings attached? We're not interested in buying someone else's property just for the sake of acquiring all these extra costs and repairs."

Normally, he said, "when the feds are disposing of a property, they offer it to the province and then to the municipality."

The Ontario Realty Corporation, a provincial agency that owns the property adjacent to the coal dock, has not responded to Whig Standard inquiries as to whether it has plans to acquire the property or service it for public use.

Glover said that waterfront property is an important asset to the city, and that in principal it should be accessible and properly maintained.

"What are the options does the city have for putting a property standards order on the feds?" he said. "It's worth looking into."

Kingston mariners were informed last fall that the coal dock was going to be off limits in January. A federal letter to the city's chief administrative officer in early March said inspections of the dock in July 2010 found it unsafe for public use.

Some Kingston residents have expressed concerned about losing waterfront access and want to know when or if the fence will come down.

Another portion of waterfront property — the drydock adjacent to the Marine Museum on Ontario Street — has also been barred by a federal fence for the past two summers, this one by the Ministry of Public Works and Government Services.

"It's understood that the dock is unsafe and the government is sorting something out," said Glover.

"They've told me nothing."



sbutler@thewhig.com

Original source: http://kingstonwhigstandard.com/ArticleDisplay.aspx?e=3073602

