---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20100531/"
title: "__Whig20100531"

---

##Kingston rowers perform well on international stage###WORLD CUP: Rob Gibson wins bronze, while Isolda Penney reaches A final in top-circuit debut

By MIKE KOREEN



A proud father, Ron Gibson -- naturally -- was quite happy on Sunday after his son, Rob, earned a bronze medal at the Rowing World Cup in Bled, Slovenia.

But when congratulated for his son's achievement by a reporter in the aftermath of the podium appearance, he switched the tone of the conversation with his first words.

"Not enough is being said about (Isolda Penney)," Ron said. "What she did is just off the scale."

Penney, developed at Kingston Rowing Club, just like Rob, reached the A final in the women's single in her first career World Cup and finished sixth.

While sixth, in this particular race, was last, Penney has every reason to hold her head high when you consider her road to the race.

Penney returned to rowing just three years ago after taking a whopping 10-year break from the sport to raise a family.

The Kingston Collegiate graduate finished second in her heat on Friday and then won her rep on Saturday to earn a spot in the final.

That effort earned her praise from the higher-ups at Rowing Canada.

"Isolda rowed a really smart race, reading the winds well and using her length to control the race early," Rowing Canada women's lead coach Al Morrow said.

The final didn't go as well. Penney was rowing in one of the lanes that had a television boat in it and Kingston Rowing Club coach John Armitage said that proved to be issue.

"She was very distracted by it, but these are the kind of things that happen in your first international race," Armitage said. "You don't see many rowers making the A final in their international debut."

Gibson, meanwhile, also helped post a surprising result. He was part of an inexperienced men's four boat that started rowing together just three weeks ago.

He was joined in the boat by Queen's University graduate Mike Wilkinson of Vancouver, Doug Csima of Oakville and Fraser Berkhout of St. Catharines.

"(Rowing Canada) sent a young four, not a veteran team, just to gauge the level of the competition," Armitage said. "That's a surprise bronze medal."

Another Queen's graduate, Rares Crisan of Mississauga, finished 10th overall as part of the Canadian light four men's boat.

The rowers now come home to Canada, where they'll continue training in hopes of getting invites to major international events later this year.

Canada will send a team to the Henley Royal Regatta in England from June 30 to July 4 and the Rowing World Cup in Lucerne, Switzerland from July 9 to 11.

The biggest event this year is the world championships from Oct. 3 to Nov. 7 at Lake Karapiro, New Zealand.



Article ID# 2600609

