---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20090916/"
title: "__Whig20090916"

---

## LAKE ONTARIO PARK: Residents get a chance to offer input on proposed revitalization <p>By PETER HENDRA



Tony Dowling takes a walk in Lake Ontario Park every day. He started going there to rehabilitate his replaced hip, but now he just goes to savour the surroundings.

He wants to keep them just the way they are.

"Everybody is trying to go back to the way things were in the old days and have everything natural," Dowling said yesterday. "What's more natural than that park? What's wrong with those beautiful trees?"

When the city unveils its master plan for revitalizing Lake Ontario Park tonight, expect to see Dowling clutching his petition and sitting near the front.

Dowling, who moved to Kingston from Vancouver almost two years ago, and some friends have gathered 450 names on a petition opposing proposed major changes to the west-end park. Dowling said he is not one to get involved in politics, but the proposed park plan has riled him.

"I'm just trying to do what I think is right," Dowling said.

The proposed element that puzzles Dowling the most is a pond where the parking lot now sits. In the winter, the proposal indicates, the pond will become an outdoor skating rink.

He wonders whether a pond might be superfluous to a waterfront park.

Lanie Hurdle, the city's director of recreation and leisure services, said the pond was suggested by the consultant for a couple of reasons.

"One of them was to collect some of the storm water coming from the parking lot area," she said yesterday. "The other was in connection with the splash pad being proposed."

Hurdle said the pond proposal has so far raised the biggest ruckus with constituents.

Advertisement

"I've asked the consultant to pull together what would be the (saving) if we were to pull that element out of the plan," Hurdle said yesterday.

Since the plan being unveiled tonight is just a proposal, it can still be tweaked.

"A concept plan doesn't mean that, when we get to the details, everything will be as is on the plan," Hurdle said.

Tonight's meeting, which is being hosted by the Arts, Recreation and Community Policies Committee, is being held in the cafetorium of Loyalist Collegiate at 7 p. m.

Hurdle will outline the details of the plan tonight. Residents will also be able to file written submissions about the proposed master plan to the committee. Those submissions will be discussed at the committee's meeting on Sept. 24.

From that meeting, it's hoped a final master plan will finally take shape and be presented to council.

While tonight's meeting is a chance for residents to air their concerns, Hurdle hopes there will be some positive feedback as well.

"It would be nice to also hear what the positive elements are in the park because what I think what we've been hearing are what people don't like," Hurdle said.

"We also don't want to change things that people might like, because we're not hearing much of what they like."

Dowling, for one, isn't against every element being proposed for the park. He agrees that the walkways should be widened and that the park does need some attention.

"The splash pad for the kids ... it's lovely to see kids and families in the park," Dowling said.

"That's a great idea, I think."

<br>

Lake Ontario Park
What:Public meeting to discuss the park's master plan.
Where:Loyalist Collegiate cafetorium, 153 Van Order Dr.
When:Tonight, 7 p. m.
On the net:View the report at www.cityofkingston.ca/lop


Article ID# 1754528
