---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20110629/"
title: "__Whig20110629"

---

##Study recommends second ferry
By Samantha Butler

<div class="column2">

A second, larger ferry between the Barrack Street dock in Kingston and Dawson Point on Wolfe Island is the best way to accommodate traffic increases between Wolfe Island and downtown Kingston, the regional operations office for the Ontario Ministry of Transportation has determined.

Members of the ministry's Wolfe Island transportation project released the recommendation Tuesday afternoon.

"We had a lot of options," said Heather Roebuck, who has worked as a regional operations officer for the Ministry of Transportation for the past five years.

The ministry initiated a planning study in 1994 to analyze ferry usage and potential improvements. However, the environmental process was never completed, and with significant time lapsed, the project was started again.

The first series of meetings for this planning study were held last March, Roebuck said.

Suggested improvements included a bridge to Wolfe Island, a pedestrian-only ferry, and passenger tolls to control demand. The report includes detailed analysis of alternatives the team considered, with several earmarked for future incorporation into the plan

"There's still a bit of a way to go," Roebuck said.

A second ferry wouldn't hit the water for at least four years, she said, and between now and then, this report must be finalized with public feedback. Then, an environmental assessment and dock and boat designs all need to be completed.

All that, Roebuck said, before the construction contracts can be tendered for the physical work to begin.

Roebuck said the review team moved away from the bridge option because of existing traffic congestion issues on the Kings­ton mainland.

"The best landing location for the bridge would be east of the causeway," she said, based on factors such as bridge length, weather conditions and construction resources.

"Anyone who has travelled east of the causeway knows that's an existing problem," she said.

"Until the congestion problem is solved," with a new bridge over the Cataraqui River, "there's no point in adding more traffic."

Operating on the basis that this issue won't be resolved "in the near future," Roebuck said the team is feeling positive about the proposed ferry plan.

"We forecast the traffic volume in this planning study 20 years into the future," Roebuck said. "This solution meets that."

The new ferry will carry 75 vehicles, 20 more than today's Wolfe Islander III, which has been crossing the lake since 1976.

Whether both boats need to run all the time and how to organize an extra 75 cars at the Kingston marshalling area still needs to be determined by future studies, she said.

"We're looking at priority measures for travellers, maybe for green cars or smaller vehicles," she said, as well as "demand management options" such as fares.

"Again that needs to be (studied) because there are a lot of options," she said. "Would you charge fares at certain times of day? Could there be a pass card for residents, or do you buy a daily ticket? Is there a discount for multiple trips?

"It needs to be looked at on its own."

Wolfe Island residents hosted the same presentation on Monday night, and Roebuck said it was generally well received.

"There are a variety of opinions on the Island," she said.

"Obviously, they'd like to see it up and running as soon as possible. Some people were asking, 'Will you have it in by the end of the year then?' but once we explained the process to them, they understood."

There were distinct pro and anti-bridge groups as well, she said.

"There are obviously still constraints with a ferry," Roebuck said. "Seniors on the island seemed worried about the ability to get to the mainland for doctors appointments."

From the opposite camp, she said, there are people in favour of a ferry "because they like the culture of the island," she said.

By running the ferry from a separate location than the summer dock in central Marysville, she said, the plan could alleviate summer traffic problems on Wolfe Island.

"Overall, it should be an improvement to the quality of life there," she said.

Hugh Gale, the senior special projects planner for the City of Kingston, made rounds of the display in the Holiday Inn conference room Tuesday night.

A municipality ultimately has no control over what the provincial transportation ministry decides to do, but he said the city will issue a formal response.

"I notice that some of our responses from the previous meeting (in March) have been picked up on," Gale said.

Roebuck said her team also wants to co-ordinate downtown Kingston public transit routes with the new ferry to help manage traffic and facilitate pedestrians and bicycles for Wolfe Island commuters.

</div>

sbutler@thewhig.com


Article ID# 3191955
