---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20080719/"
title: "__Whig20080719"

---

##Let's restore Richardson Beach<p>
By Jamie Linton and David McDonald
<p>
Sometimes our most valuable assets go unnoticed. Kingston's Richardson Beach is one such example. A popular swimming spot and valued public space since the late 1800s until quite recently, we have let it fall into disuse.
<p>
Maybe this has to do with the (generally mistaken) notion that the water quality in Lake Ontario is poor. Maybe we have come to expect that a beach should be white sand and palm trees. Or maybe we've turned ourselves into individual "taxpayers" and forgotten about the things we hold in common and that bind us as a community.
<p>
In any case, Richardson Beach is now practically empty. Even the hottest July afternoon finds only a rare bather in the water or using the all-but-forgotten Richardson Bath House. The facilities that the city once maintained are no longer safe or convenient. Today's bather must use a dank change room and run a gauntlet of slippery rocks. Despite the fact that the water quality is generally better than it has been for decades, one risks pain just trying to get into it.
<p>
The time is ripe for restoring Richardson Beach. Its location - just east of the Murney Tower at the foot of Barrie Street - makes it easily accessible for those living in central Kingston.
<p>
As the options for outdoor public swimming are closed off by privatization of shorelines and development on waterfronts, places such as Richardson Beach are rare public assets. With growing concerns about sedentary lifestyles, we can use them to promote activity.
<p>
Considerable investments made by the city in recent years to improve sewage treatment and reduce stormwater runoff have resulted in cleaner water and better swimming in the lake. It may not be perfect, but we must engage with our water if we are to learn about its quality.
<p>
In the summer of 2005, restoring Richardson Beach garnered considerable interest in the local media and was brought to the attention of city council. Despite widespread public support for the cause (and despite Mayor Harvey Rosen's promise. during his re-election campaign, to restore the beach) nothing concrete has happened. We have recently learned that officials in the city's culture and recreation department have been working on plans for its restoration, however.
<p>
We now need to send a signal to the mayor and city council that there is widespread support for bringing these plans to fruition. To that end, we are calling on all interested citizens to show up at Richardson Beach at 6 p. m. on Tuesday for a mass swim. The idea is to get as many people as possible (safely) into the water as an expression of support. The event will be held rain or shine, and please remember to exercise caution.
<p>
The city will also be having an information and consultation session on its restoration plans that evening at the Richardson Beach site. This runs from 6:30 to 8 p. m. and will provide citizens with an opportunity to see, and comment on, the draft plans.
<p>
For those who wish to show support but are not inclined to swim, you are encouraged to drop by and learn more. Also on hand will be representatives from Kingston, Frontenac and Lennox and Addington Public Health to discuss water quality issues; from the Kingston Historical Society to discuss the rich history of the site; and from Lake Ontario Waterkeepers, a citizen group working for a healthy Lake Ontario.
<p>
Finally, make sure to visit the Richardson Bath House, built in 1919 as a bequest of Capt. George Taylor Richardson and dedicated "to the children and citizens of Kingston." There are change rooms for men and women.
<p>
With your support - along with some political insight, resources and goodwill - this beautiful building, and the beach itself, will once again provide recreation and a sense of public space for the children and other citizens of Kingston.
<p>
Jamie Linton and David McDonald live in Kingston.

