---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20061204/"
title: "__Whig20061204"

---

##Sale all wetby Brock Harrison , The Whig Standard
December 04, 2006

Kingston may soon get a crack at controlling the waterways that surround the city now that the federal government is trying again to rid itself of the city’s harbour bed.

Early next year, Ottawa will put up for sale 7.5 square kilometres of water lot – the geographic area the water occupies, not the water itself – which stretches southward from Belle Island around the downtown Kingston waterfront and west to Lake Ontario Park.

Whoever acquires the water lots isn’t purchasing the water itself but rather the rights to the space above the water. Nick Heisler, a spokesperson for the International Joint Commission, a Canada-U.S. organization that mediates disputes over international water use, said a water lot is the “geographic plane” above the water.

The upside for whoever buys the water lots is obtaining rights to erect marine docks or other port structures above the water, he says.

“You’d have the right to the water space on the water,” Heisler said.

This will be the second time Transport Canada has tried unloading the rights to the 750-hectare harbour bed.

The federal department found no takers for the water lots during a

10-year divestiture program, under a National Marine Policy in which it sold off its docks and harbour beds to cities or community groups to give greater control to local interests.

The program closed in March.

In August, Transportation Minister Lawrence Cannon announced he was restarting the divestiture program.

“The program allows communities to benefit from the advantages of local operation, including the flexibility to respond to changing needs and new business development opportunities,” Cannon said at the time.

Last week, the department put out a call for a market-value appraisal to be done on the Kingston harbour bed for the purpose of future negotiations.

“The appraisal figure will be used for the department’s negotiations with parties interested in acquiring the harbour,” said spokesperson Julie Iannetta.

Once the water lots are assessed and officially put up for sale, they will first be offered to other federal departments. If the feds take a pass, the lots will then be offered to lower levels of government.

Asked if there were instances of Transport Canada selling water space to private investors, Iannetta said, “I’m sure that there have been.” She could not cite any examples.

During the original divestiture program, Transport Canada was able to transfer ownership of 466 of its 549 wharfs and harbour beds to local interests, saving $210 million in federal tax dollars.

The Kingston harbour bed was a holdover from the original program. Iannetta said the city expressed no interest in acquiring rights to the water at the time the program was running.

“I don’t believe there ever were any negotiations,” Iannetta said.

William Tetley, an expert on maritime law at Montreal’s McGill University, says municipally owned harbour beds give cities greater control over developing their waterfronts.

Rather than dealing with the federal government incrementally and periodically on individual waterfront issues, the city can decide when, where and how to develop waterfront lands.

“Some cities, like Montreal, feel that kind of control is very important,” said Tetley. “There may very well be considerable interest from Kingston. Maybe they don’t feel the port has been properly developed.”

The city leases two marina properties along the soon-to-be-for-sale water lots, at Confederation Basin and Portsmouth Olympic Harbour. They have lease agreements with the federal Department of Fisheries and Oceans to use the water lots. Those leases won’t be subject to Transport Canada’s market value assessment.

Speros Kanellos, the city’s director of growth, says Kingston would be open to negotiating with Transport Canada on a possible transaction of the rest of the harbour bed.

“Anything that deals with our waterfront we’d be interested in talking to them about,” Kanellos said.

Developer Kim Donovan said he would also be interested in participating in discussions that would “maximize the opportunity of our waterfront from Treasure Island to Collins Bay.

“This goes beyond private property interests,” he said. “This is a community interest. This is a tremendous asset. It’s our great God-given gift.”

Donovan’s company, Kincore Holdings Ltd., recently signed a deal with the city to develop the contaminated Davis Tannery site on Rideau Street. The property looks over the Cataraqui River, north of the downtown, and is part of the water space that Transport Canada is selling.

Nobody at city hall could say why Kingston did not attempt to take control of the harbour bed during the decade-long divestiture program.

Robin Brown, a spokesman at Transport Canada headquarters in Ottawa, could not estimate how much acquiring the harbour bed would cost Kingston.

Three existing Transport Canada lease agreements for water space will be subject to a future transaction; one for docking and mooring space with the residents of the Frontenac Village condo complex downtown, one with resident Philip Brown for a berm just off King Street; and one for marina docks with Kingston Marina.

The market value appraisal of the harbour bed is to be finished by February and then negotiations can start.

