---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20090810/"
title: "__Whig20090810"

---

##Poker Run participants defend event
By IAN ELLIOT



The people who drove the boats in this weekend's Poker Run don't even pretend that they're behind the wheel of a floating Prius.

When more than 60 high-powered cigarette boats took to the water for a cruise down to Brockville and back on Saturday, there was much criticism of them as gas-guzzling, emission-spewing behemoths that the city would be better off not having.

City council has mused aloud about not having the event in Kingston in future years; environmental groups have protested that the boats spew out as much pollution as idling cars do in the city for an entire year -- a statement hotly disputed by many boaters -- and organizers have said that if Kingston doesn't want the annual boat run here, there are lots of other towns on the Thousand Islands who would be happy to have it.

The crews of those boats have heard it before -- perhaps not as intensely as they hear it in Kingston -- but when you're behind the wheel of a boat with a pair of supercharged 1075 Mercury marine engines whose only job is to make it go as fast as stink, you can hear very little.

In fact, when their engines fire up, they render conversation impossible.

"This boat will burn 1.2 gallons a mile, and it's fitted with emissions controls from the factory," said Tom Healey, a participant from New Jersey, as he prepares to cast off with Michael Merritt, who came up from Ohio to take part in the poker run.

"See that ferry over there?" he asks. "That probably burns 300 gallons an hour with no emissions controls, and what it's putting out is sooty, black smoke from diesel."

Most of the boats are equipped with the aforementioned Mercury engines, with a handful of other engines, including Jim Stevenson's boat, which is powered by a pair of V10 engines identical to what you'd find under the hood of a Dodge Viper.

The boat was expected to burn about $800 of high octane fuel during the cruise to Brockville and back.

"We hear it a bit, the amount of gas we go through, but these runs are an opportunity to raise money for charity, and thousands of people come out to see us, not just people on the shore, but boats on the water waiting for us to go by."

John Lang, a Mississauga man who got into poker runs on the urging of his business partner in Toronto, was aware of the controversy in the pages of the newspaper and has heard it before.

But he said the few hours the boats actually run result in a negligible amount of pollution and that is outweighed by the money they raise and spend during the run.

"The people who are against it have a right to be against it," he said.

"There are a lot of people who aren't very happy with the lack of environmental attention of these boats and that's fine, but they're not in the water for that long and we spend a fair bit of money in the communities we visit.

"These poker runs also raise a lot of money for the charities they support, and that's what a lot of us are here for -- if we weren't raising money for a good cause, I wouldn't be here today."



Article ID# 1692542
