---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20090523/"
title: "__Whig20090523"

---


##Boaters 'held ransom', said vessel owner###WATERCRAFT: Marina placed in receivership causes weeks of delays until this week
By W. BRICE MCVICAR, SUN MEDIA

<div class="column2">

Boats are finally floating free from a bayshore marina after weeks of legal limbo for their owners.

Boaters who had paid to have their vessels stored and lifted into the water at the former Morch Marine property were being held "ransom" said one boater.

Many of those boaters were on the property yesterday, after weeks of speculation about what would happen to their vessels since the property was placed in receivership early last month. BDO Dunwoody, following a ruling in an Ontario court, took over the Dundas Street West property from Belle Harbour Developments Inc., which had purchased the land and buildings in 2007.

When the property went into receivership, the roughly 100 boats that had been stored at the marina for the winter became landlocked, as BDO Dunwoody did not have insurance to cover any liability. This meant boaters could not have their vessels lifted into the waters of the Bay of Quinte. Canada Revenue had taken possession of equipment on the land, including the boat lift.

Bay Marine in Bayside has since purchased the lift and began the task of lifting boats into the waters earlier this week.

The news brought relief to many boaters, but it also brought an unexpected strain on their wallets. John Batchelor told Sun Media he and other boaters had paid Belle Harbour to have their boats lifted off cradles and into the water. The payment, he said, had been included with winter storage costs. Because Belle Harbour is no longer the property owner, boaters had to pay, again, to have their boat lifted into the waters.

"We're being held ransom," Batchelor said. "We're having to pay to launch our boats and we've already paid."

Batchelor said the entire situation is frustrating as BDO Dunwoody has had no communication with boaters, leaving owners who haven't yet retrieved their vessels wondering the fate of their boat. It is only through word of mouth, he said, that boaters are learning they can have their boats removed from the property.

Frustration and disbelief were expressed by Wooler's Norm Struthers who said this was the latest he has ever had his boat in the water after decades of boating.

Struthers said he had signed a waiver with BDO Dunwoody claiming he would not hold the company responsible should anything happen to his boat, the Shady Lady, during the lifting and launching process. Once that document was signed, he said, he was free to have the boat placed in the water so he could find another marina to dock at for the season.

No one from BDO Dunwoody was available for comment yesterday.

</div>

Article ID# 1580571
