---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20080904/"
title: "__Whig20080904"

---

##Development ban plan panned###Proposal would halt building along Rideau Canal, Cataraqui River until planning guidelines established

By JORDAN PRESS

<div class="column2">
A City Councillor that represents an area stee ped in the Rideau Canal is lambasting her colleagues who she claims are trying to "slide one by" the residents of Kingston.

Councillor Joyce MacLeod-Kane said yesterday that the city shouldn't put a temporary halt on development along the Rideau Canal and Cataraqui River without first holding a public meeting.

A proposal before council would, if passed, have the city ban all development along the UNESCO World Heritage Site for up to one year while it develops planning guidelines for the area.

The proposal went before council Tuesday night, but no decision was made. The meeting came to a close at 11 p. m. with politicians in the midst of debate.

MacLeod-Kane said the city has held public meetings on issues such as banning plastic shopping bags and street hockey and should at least do the same here.

"These are the same councillors that are screaming that the public should have input in everything," MacLeod-Kane said yesterday, "and something as big as this they shouldn't have a right to speak on?"

The Countryside District councillor said she's opposed to the proposal with the way that it's been presented, "being put forward so fast and the public doesn't have a chance to act on it."

This week, councillors started into a debate on a motion about whether to create something called an interim control bylaw, a planning tool that allows a municipality to put a pause on development in an area while the city comes up with planning guidelines for it.

The proposal before council would cover any new development within 120 metres of the high water mark of the river from the [[LaSalle Causeway]] to the northern boundary of the city. Council would have to approve any development applications in that area while an interim control bylaw is in place.

The prohibition wouldn't apply to any existing buildings along the canal. "We risk losing the beauty and originality and uniqueness of this land if we don't control development," Councillor Vicki Schmolka told councillors Tuesday night.

"It would really be a mistake to not put in controls," she said.

She said approving her proposal wouldn't mean permanently banning development along the canal, but the message would be that "things have to go slow for a while."

During the meeting, MacLeod-Kane questioned what the proposal would mean for those applications already before the city and whether city hall would provide tax breaks to those with affected properties.

She said the matter should go to a city committee where the public can have a chance to speak about the idea.

The city normally has to hold public meetings in planning manners, but provincial legislation doesn't require a municipality to hold a public meeting prior to implementing an interim control bylaw, said planning director George Wallace.

Shortly after Wallace's comment, the clock struck 11 p. m. and the meeting came to a close.

Yesterday, MacLeod-Kane said she has received phone calls from residents concerned about what this will mean for their waterfront properties. She took a shot at her urban colleagues, saying they want to come to the country and do things for it when it's convenient.

She suggested the city should look at dealing with the waterfront downtown and trying to make it one seamless route, not obstructed by buildings.

"You can't walk on the waterfront downtown," she said.
</div>

Original: http://kingstonwhigstandard.com/ArticleDisplay.aspx?e=1184443

