---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20100309/"
title: "__Whig20100309"

---

##Buoyed by progress###RENOVATIONS: City moving ahead with revitalization of Richardson Beach, its bath house and Macdonald Park

By PAUL SCHLIESMANN



Nearly two years after a mass swim for action, the city is moving ahead with a $400,000 plan to revitalize Richardson Beach, the bath house and Macdonald Park.

City councillors have approved spending $280,000 on improving the park and beach area and $100,000 on repairing the 91-year-old bath house. Another $10,000 will be spent on fixing up the Newlands Pavilion.

Despite their success, the two men leading the effort say dealing with city hall has been like swimming against a strong current.

"It's been a frustrating experience in that there appears to be a lot of interest in it, and political will, but getting it on the front burner has been quite difficult," said David McDonald who, along with Jamie Linton, organized the 2008 swim.

"The good news is that the budget looks rather substantial. It's certainly better than where we were 12 months ago. This has been many years in the making," said McDonald.

McDonald's main concern is that even though $400,000 has been budgeted for the revitalization it may not upgrade the facilities enough to make the park attractive to swimmers.

"The building's in pretty rough shape and the change rooms are dank and dingy. It smells like urine," McDonald said. "In my opinion, the change rooms need to be gutted and re-done.

"These are important things. All these structural things need to be done, but both Jamie and I hope when it's done it looks like there's a substantial aesthetic change."

McDonald said three city councillors -- Rob Hutchison, Bill Glover and Vicki Schmolka -- have been instrumental in moving the project forward.

Schmolka described the work done last fall and what's to come this year as "a positive first step."

"What it will do is encourage people to relate to the lake more and we'll see how much people like the idea of swimming there," she said. "I think it's the start of encouraging people to come back."

For decades, Richardson Beach was a popular swimming hole. But not for the past 30 years as pollution made it unusable and the large rocks and algae made the waters difficult to navigate.

Last fall, city staff cleared the beach area -- actually a large limestone rock shelf -- and they will do the same this year in a regular basis.

Part of the park budget will include hiring a student to keep the rock debris, which gets washed into the swimming area by waves, cleared away.

"You need to have somebody go in on a regular basis to clear the stones," said McDonald. "You have a beautiful shelf of limestone you can walk out knee-deep and start swimming in. It's a natural swimming location."

On dry land, some of the improvements will include:

* new pathways and accessible ramps to the pavilion;
* a terrace area with accessible picnic tables
* additional bike racks and car parking;
* additional trees.

McDonald said the budget for the beach is still tiny compared to other city expenditures.

"I guess it's a bit frustrating when you look at what we spend, as well as talking about building an indoor pool for 25 million bucks," he said.

What the city needs now, McDonald added, is a waterfront master plan to make the entire shoreline more inviting for Kingstonians.

"We're not done," he said, raising the possibility of another mass swim for awareness. "We see this as a significant first step that's going to need to be a lot more significant over the years.

"We're delighted something is happening but we've got to keep the pressure up."



Article ID# 2482331

