---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20081020/"
title: "__Whig20081020"

---

##A dream is reborn###OUR VIEW

<div class="column2">
Ten years ago, the dream of transforming the Marine Museum of the Great Lakes into a showpiece tourism attraction sank from public sight.

Scuttled along with the plans for a special drydock display was a proposal to build a deepwater pier to attract the cruise ships that take tourists up and down the Great Lakes.

All failed because the millennium fund program established by the federal Liberal government of the day rejected the Kingston request for about $1.1 million in funding.

Thankfully, the dream never died among the small and dedicated circle of volunteers and staff who continue to believe that the museum's full potential will some day be realized - and that Kingston will get the kind of waterfront facilities it needs and deserves.

It's difficult to say where the project now stands, given the re-election of a minority Conservative government.

According to marine museum directors, the previous Conservative government was responsible for getting us closer to a deal that would see the historically designated drydock repaired at federal expense and then turned over to the city for future development.

They credit, in particular, the intervention of Sen. Hugh Segal, who had the ear of former senator and public works minister Michael Fortier. The potential hitch is that Fortier resigned from the senate, ran for a seat in Quebec in last week's election, and lost. He is out of government.

Hopefully, the wheels that were set in motion by these two individuals will continue to turn within the public works bureaucracy.

We also realize that tight economic times are approaching and that the new government of Prime Minister Stephen Harper will have to make some tough budgetary decisions.

But from an economic development standpoint alone, this waterfront project in Kingston is too important to let slip away again. It would be an excellent investment in the city's economic future.

The extensive conceptual plan devised for the museum way back in 1998 anticipated 48,000 to 77,000 visitors annually if the renovations and upgrades to the museum and drydock were completed. That didn't include the influx of visitors from cruise ships attracted to the city.

The plan is also important from a heritage perspective. The drydock was designated a national historic site in 1986. Museum staff and directors see its completion as a continuation of the UNESCO world heritage site status awarded last year to the Rideau Canal, Fort Henry and the Kingston fortifications.

On top of all this, the museum library is an important academic resource for historians and researchers.

So, where do we go from here?

It's time our re-elected MP, Peter Milliken, put the marine museum project at the top of his to-do list.

Milliken spoke during the election campaign of how he had worked closely with Segal on the K-Rock Centre funding application. Perhaps, together, they could ensure this project doesn't end up forgotten in a dusty file for another decade.

When the museum last applied for federal funds to build the pier in 2001, again through the millennium fund, officials accused city staff of not offering enough assistance. Today, relations between the city and the museum are apparently much better.

It's time to resurrect this worthwhile project from the depths.
</div>
