---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20070824/"
title: "__Whig20070824"

---

##City buys riverside property; Land purchase step toward securing public use of waterfront

Brock Harrison
Local news - Friday, August 24, 2007 @ 00:00

Kingston has taken one more step toward securing the public use of its waterfront by purchasing 45 acres of riverside property on the city's far east side.

The property, located at 2931 Highway 2 East, lies just west of Grass Creek Park, where the annual sheep dog trials are held, and faces nearly 200 feet of the St. Lawrence River shoreline along the Bateau Channel. It also has frontage along Highway 2 and includes a residence and a log cabin.

The purchase, done through an auction, was for $803,000, and will be completed on Sept. 17, according to a city news release.

Staff will now go about reviewing how the property may be worked into the city's municipal parks system by attaching it to Grass Creek Park.

The fully developed English Landing subdivision borders the property to the west.


The property, if added to the 52-acre Grass Creek Park, would almost double the park's size. Grass Creek Park is currently a multi-use park with a well-manicured beach, a playground, washrooms and open rolling hills that stretch from Highway 2 down to the St. Lawrence River.

The park shares a property with the MacLachlan Woodworking Museum which is located just off the entrance near the highway.

The new lands would provide the park with more room to host the annual sheep dog trials. The trials attract more than 7,000 people over a weekend each summer.

City commissioner Cynthia Beach says another possible scenario would be adding only a portion of the newly acquired land onto Grass Creek Park as an enhancement and the surplus land sold off.

"Some of it may be used for overflow parking during the sheep dog trials," Beach said.

The purchase was in keeping with the city's waterfront policy that stipulates wherever possible, the city will acquire waterfront land in order to keep it in the public domain, Beach said.

She described the new parcel as a "very natural" area and says the actual shoreline would likely be left alone if the city decides to hang on to it. The rest of the area could be integrated into a network of trails for hiking and skiing.

"It's not likely that this space would be specifically used for beach," she said.

Further decisions about what the city will do with the property will be made when council begins debating the Parks and Recreation Master Plan. Beach says that should get underway sometime this fall.

In addition to the beach and playground, Grass Creek also offers the public a boat launch, picnic area, pavilion and ball diamond and is a venue for a variety of summer camps.

The auctioneer, Gordon's Estate Services, billed the property for private use, describing it as a "terrific waterfront property to build an exclusive waterfront home or develop into lots."

The property, zoned "estate residential" according to the auction listing, had space for 18 lots, including one directly on the water. The listing also says both residences on the property are occupied. bharrison@thewhig.com


