---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20080707/"
title: "__Whig20080707"

---

##Rowers record Henley victory###Crothers, Gibson on winning crew
THE CANADIAN PRESS

Kingston rowers Will Crothers and Rob Gibson helped Canada's under-23 men's eight beat the University of Southern California in the Grand Challenge Cup event at the Henley Royal Regatta yesterday.

The Canadians defeated the American crew by two boat lengths in a time of 6 minutes 29 seconds.

Joining Kingston Rowing Club members Crothers and Gibson, who will be an alternate on Canada's Olympic rowing team this summer, on the winning crew yesterday were Anthony Jacob of Vancouver, Conlin McCabe of Brockville, Will Dean of Kelowna, B. C., Blake Pucsek and Chris Aylard of Victoria, Stephen Connolly of Calgary and coxswain Ronan Sabo-Walsh of Vancouver.

The Grand Challenge Cup is the regatta's most prestigious event and has been competed for annually since 1839.

The Canadian under-23 rowers now head to Brandenburg, Germany, for their age-group world championships, July 17-20.

It was a successful day for Canada yesterday, with two other eights crews taking titles.

Vancouver Island's Shawnigan Lake School defeated England's Eton College by three quarters of a length with a final time of 6.48, winning the Princess Elizabeth Challenge Cup for junior men's eights.

On Saturday, the University of Western Ontario men's eight defeated Trinity College of Hartford, Conn., by 2 3 /4 lengths in 6:42 to win the Temple Challenge Cup final. Trinity caught an oar in the water and lurched to one side, allowing the Canadians to push ahead after a few strokes and go on to victory.
