---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20090326/"
title: "__Whig20090326"

---

##Marina plan sailing forward###COUNCIL: City politicians consider $18.1-million project

By JORDAN PRESS

<div class="column2">

City councillors have cautiously agreed to move a step closer to a $18.1-million renovation plan for Kingston's marinas.

Political approval for the spending is still required.

This week, some city councillors said they felt the city needed to spend the cash, but maybe not do everything consultants recommended.

They will decide what to spend on which items when they debate the 2009 and 2010 capital budgets in June.

"The marinas need the capital investment, but maybe not all at once," said Councillor Sara Meers.

A consultants' report last month recommended the city spend millions to upgrade its two marinas.

Of the six marinas in Kingston and the immediate vicinity, only two are publicly owned: Flora MacDonald Confederation Basin and Portsmouth Olympic Harbour.

They also happen to be the two largest marinas in Kingston. The two operations will require a taxpayer subsidy of $320,000 this year, according to a city staff report.

The city looked at selling the marinas in 2006 after a tough 2005 season. City hall received five proposals from potential private operators, but decided instead to continue operating the two facilities.

The consultants recommended adding slips to the marinas, expanding other slips and increasing the amount of electricity the docks can supply to 50 amps.

The report recommended constructing a new 200-slip marina on the edge of Block D and spend millions to construct a new boater services building.

Repaying that spending could take between 13 and 25 years, the consultant says, depending on the operating surpluses the two marinas generate.

Those surpluses, estimated to be between $700,000 and $1.4 million per year, are dependent on "how aggressively the marinas are promoted and operated," the report says.

"This is a very complex strategy and business plan," said Councillor Rob Hutchison.

He said there are parts of the plan that could be done for less than what's being proposed. Hutchison said he wasn't interested in spending the entire amount.

Councillor Leonore Foster said the city needed to review priorities and see what it could reasonably do with the marinas.

She said she felt the city needed to spend the money because of the economic advantages that it could bring to Kingston.

The resolution approved at council this week also included a provision that staff talk with the Coast Guard about the relocation of the marine force's office to a small park by Portsmouth Olympic Harbour.

</div>

Article ID# 1495714
