---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20070519/"
title: "__Whig20070519"

---

<strong>Fishing seasons to change</strong>

The Whig-Standard
Local Sports - Saturday, May 19, 2007 Updated @ 11:36:10 PM

By Doug Graham

Whig-Standard Staff Writer

The popular lake trout season opens on inland waters on June 2 in what will be the final summer for anglers to face a myriad of regulations in the three divisions that cover the Kingston area.

Anglers, who have faced the daunting task of deciphering season openings and limits that fluctuate in the five divisions covering Lake Ontario, the St. Lawrence River and the inland lakes, will see a simpler version next year.

The Ministry of Natural Resources is condensing the number of divisions and bringing revised regulations in as of Jan. 1 next year.

"It will be a much clearer, simpler version for anglers to follow. We will be going from 37 divisions to 20 zones," said Cam McCauley, landscape planning biologist for the MNR at the Kingston area office on Heakes Lane.

The condensing of divisions for Kingston and area lakes means that three divisions – 9, 10 and 29 covering a wide area from Napanee in the west to Hawkesbury in the east and north beyond Highway 7 up to Arnprior – will be rolled into one mega Zone 18 with similar regulations.


"The whole idea behind this new ecological zone is to treat everything the same within the species. That way when you have the same characteristics, spawning seasons and that sort of thing, we can keep it simple," McCauley said.

"We will be able to get rid of three different sets of regulations."

Until Jan. 1, however, area inland waters remain under their separate regulations. In the case of lake trout, it means that while the season opened in Division 29 on March 10, in Divisions 9 and 10 lake trout fishing opens on June 2.

"Some of the seasons and bag limits are the same, regardless of which divisions, but there are some differences. There are exceptions and that is where it gets confusing," McCauley said.

One of the inquiries McCauley’s office has been fielding all winter long is with regards to the lake trout season on Loughborough Lake, which annually receives the highest number of stocked trout by the ministry.

"Eventually with the new regulations, Loughborough will be open (for lake trout) year round, but that is not in effect yet. The opening is the first Saturday in June and the season closes on Sept. 8, so this fall [Loughborough] won’t be open for lake trout," McCauley said.

"As of Jan. 1, however, Loughborough will be open year round. That’s additional opportunities for the angler."

Loughborough will be one of the exceptions, however, in Zone 18 for lake trout fishing. Other lakes will have the same opening date – the fourth Saturday of May – and close again in early September. It will mean in the case of Division 29, where lake trout fishing has been open since March 10, that the early May fishing time will be lost.

"It will be easier going to one opening and one closing time. The new regulations are coming and it simplifies and clears up things,’’ McCauley said.

The fact that Lake Ontario – now Division 8 – and the St. Lawrence River – now Division 11 – will be also combined to make Zone 20, will also add more clarity over regulations. What exists now, for example, is that a boat pulling out of Collins Bay and heading west would be Division 8 water. The bay water itself is classified in Division 11. Under the new zone format, Collins Bay and water around Amherst Island and Wolfe Island will all be in Zone 20.
dgraham@thewhig.com

