---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20110608/"
title: "__Whig20110608"

---

##Throwing creation to the wind

By SAMANTHA BUTLER

<div class="column2">

Kingston's reputation as a world-class, freshwater sailing destination has long been a feather in the city's cap.

At the Royal Military College and Queen's University, however, sailing's been taken to a whole new level.

Teams of engineering students from both schools are heading to Annapolis, Md., this weekend for the annual United States Naval Academy's autonomous robotic "sailbot" regatta on June 13.

"It's a great engineering challenge," said Robbie Edwards, a graduate student in aerospace engineering at RMC and veteran of the college's two-year-old team.

Students design and build an original, two-metre-long vessel, capable of navigating a course on its own using onboard sensors. The ship must also have a remote control function, so that it can be reined in if something goes wrong.

"There is quite a bit of interest in autonomous sailing these days," Edwards said. "It has applications, say, in arctic sov - ereignty, in cleaning up oil spills, stuff like that. ... It doesn't take any gas to get around, so it's great to pull information out of the ocean, to just have these boats out there," he said.

"Canada has one of the longest coastlines as well," noted teammate Daniel Rudiman, "so if you want to monitor those coastlines, autonomous sailboats would be a practical way to do it."

Rudiman said the team directs the boat with a set of "way points," or GPS co-ordinates, which take about 20 minutes to program into the boat's on-board navigating system from a laptop before it launches. The boat then uses internal monitoring systems to adjust its own rudder, sail angle and camber.

Boats are pitted against each other over four days in a variety events, including a fleet race, a "station-keep," in which they hold the same position for five minutes, as well as a navigation challenge.

Points are given out for speed, accuracy and design, said Professor Paul Miller, the event chairman at the U.S. naval academy.

"The competition has a potential 50-point maximum and the best a team has done is about 28."

This is the fifth year of the event. "Each school brings their own talents, but no one's come close to cracking the ultimate challenges yet," he said.

Queen's and the U.S. naval academy are two of the longest-standing teams, Miller said, with five universities entered this year, from the University of British Columbia, Memorial University, Annapolis and the two Kingston schools.

Edwards said he's hoping that the RMC vessel will turn heads, unique because of its solid, fibre-glass wing sail.

"There aren't a lot of wing sails out there right now, but there will be in the future," Edwards said. "They do give you quite a bit more performance, so the racing world is really interested in them."

"The RMC teams have been some very out-of-the-box think - ers," Miller said.

RMC first entered last year, when Queen's hosted the regatta in Kingston.

Edwards said this year's entry is a "heavily modified" version of last year's boat, and that the team's had more time to plan and get organized.

"We spent nine months studying how to make last year's boat better, and then had the last month to build," said teammate Sebastien Royal.

Edwards said RMC has invested about $6,000 in developing the vessel, and allowed the students to take it on as a research project.

Edwards, Royal, and a fourth teammate, Aaron Bradley, will head to Annapolis in two Department of National Defence trucks with their faculty supervisor, Lieut. N. Stefane Lachance over the weekend.

Meanwhile, at Queen's University, the well-established Mostly Autonomous Sailboat Team (MAST) will bring a traditional cloth sailboat to this year's regatta.

It's also a modified version of last year's entry, said student captain Cory Green.

"We've greatly reduced the keel weight and we've picked some really simple, elegant computer system," he said.

He said the ship's navigator is "sort of analogous to the GPS in your car. It sets the course and then we have an onboard weather station that responds to apparent wind strength and wind direction, a computerized compass, and a system that tells us how far the vessel is tipping on its axis."

The larger, more informal Queen's team is completely extra- curricular, Green said, with 25 students participating in the Sailbot's design and construction through out the year.

"Some students put in a few hours a month to 30 hours a week. People come to unwind after class, to socialize and to learn," he said.

While Green said he thinks autonomous sailing technology could be an important safety feature for solo racers in the future, his main motivation to participate is the learning experience.

"Design teams like this are the easiest way for students to pick up instruments they might not be able to get access to in class," he said.

"I'm easily getting the most multi-disciplinary work experience out of this program," he said Green. "I have the opportunity to work with electrical engineers, computer engineers ... and lots of different faculty."

Miller says the students are competing for "the warm, fuzzy feeling of success, bragging rights, and a $12 trophy," but they're also helping develop academic research and learning valuable project planning and management skills, he said.

As autonomous robotic sailing develops, Edwards said, people can keep an eye out for larger, oceanic models.

"A lot of universities are trying to get boats across the Atlantic right now."

</div>

sbutler@thewhig.com


Article ID# 3159969
