---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20110901/"
title: "__Whig20110901"

---

##Kingston rowers help boost Canada to bronze medal
By Mike Koreen



Like the 100 metres in track and field, The Masters in golf and Wimbledon in tennis, the men's eight is considered the glamour event of rowing.

This week, two Kingston Rowing Club members took full advantage of the spotlight.

Rob Gibson and Will Crothers were part of a Canadian eight that raced to a bronze medal at the world championships in Bled, Slovenia on Thursday, one day after the same boat secured a 2012 London Olympics berth by finishing second in a semifinal.

"We executed a real solid race to get back on the podium," Gibson, a Regiopolis Notre Dame and Kingston Collegiate product, wrote in an e-mail shortly after his race. "The race was a real barn-burner for the entire 2,000 metres. We went into the final 500 metres in fourth place and just really hit the bottom of the well to get past the Australians in the final strokes of the race."

Indeed, Canada beat Australia to the line by 41 one-hundredths of a second to take the final spot on the podium. Germany won in 5 minutes 28.81 seconds, Great Britain was second in 5:30.83 with Canada third in 5:31.18.

The result was a significant improvement for Canada, which finished fifth at a World Cup last month in Switzerland and didn't even qualify for the A final last year at the world championships in New Zealand.

Canada is trying to return to its 2008 form, when it won the Olympic eight in Beijing. Only two rowers — Andrew Byrnes of Toronto and Malcolm Howard of Victoria — and cox Brian Price of Belleville remain from that crew.

Gibson is in his third year in the boat — he won silver in 2009 at the worlds in Poland and was a spare on the 2008 Olympic crew — while Crothers has been part of the team for two years.

Crothers, a Kingston Collegiate grad, sits right in front of the cox with Gibson behind his fellow Kingstonian.

"I could see the effort Crothers was giving in front of me and he led us right to the line," Gibson wrote.

"We now have 330 days until the London Olympics and are looking forward to training harder this winter to take a run at the world champion German crew next summer."

It was the second combined medal for Gibson and Crothers, teammates in high school and at the University of Washington, at a senior world championships. They won silver in the coxed four in England in 2006

The 2011 Canadian eight has a real eastern Ontario flavour with Price, Crothers, Gibson and Conlin McCabe of Brockville. Other rowers are Jeremiah Brown of Cobourg, Doug Csima of Oak­ville and Gabe Bergen of 100 Mile House, B.C.

"(Gibson and Crothers) should be inspiring to young high school rowers," proud Kingston Rowing Club coach John Armitage said. "It shows that you can start out in Grade 9 as a raw novice and possibly end up in the Olympics."

Even with this result, it is not a sure thing that Gibson and Crothers will be in the boat come Games time — July 27 to Aug. 12 next summer.

The pair will return home to Kingston for a few weeks before resuming training with the national team in Victoria, B.C.. Over the winter and spring, evaluations will be made to determine Canada's crew.

"What they've done is qualified the boat," Armitage said. "Rowers still have to make the boat next year. That's the way the Olympics work.

"Everybody is competing for seats. They have just as good a shot as anybody of going to the Olympics, but staying healthy is a big thing."

If they can maintain their pace and avoid the injury bug, there is every chance Crothers and Gibson will become the first born-and-bred Kingstonians to row at an Olympics.

Armitage feels the showing in Slovenia was very positive for the Canucks.

"They're a very young crew," he said. "(Coach) Mike (Sprack­len) has another year to work his magic. These guys are only going to get faster."

Meanwhile, former Queen's Golden Gaels rower Mike Wilkinson of North Vancouver and Fraser Berkhout of St. Catharines were eliminated from medal contention in the men's double after finishing fifth in a semifinal. The boat will race in the B final and still can secure an Olympic berth by placing in the top 11 overall.

Also on Thursday, former Queen's and Kingston rower Morgan Jarvis of Winnipeg and Tim Myers of Penticton, B.C., won the B final and finished seventh overall in the lightweight men's pair, a non-Olympic event.



Article id 3282844

mkoreen@thewhig.com

