---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20080819/"
title: "__Whig20080819"

---

##Child, 8, and grandfather, 67, both drown in Lake OntarioBy By Rob Tripp

<div class="column2">

The regional coroner’s office has taken charge of the investigation of a double drowning in which a 67-year-old Kingston man died while trying to save his eight-year-old grandson.

The pair died in hospital after they were pulled Monday afternoon from the rough water of Lake Ontario at a popular west end swimming spot.

“We’re just in the infancy of the investigation,” coroner Dr. Benoit Bechard said today.

Autopsies are expected to be completed today. The names of the victims have not been released.

The pair were swimming at Patterson Park, at the foot of Sunny Acres Road, just west of the DuPont beach. It is a small municipal park that features a tricky shoreline of large, flat rocks.

The child got into trouble in the water at about 1:30 p.m., according to Kingston Fire and Rescue. The area was being pounded by large waves and strong winds.

Capt. Phil Montgomery said the grandfather and other people at the park formed a chain to try and reach the boy and bring him back to shore.

The grandfather lost his grasp and was pulled under.

Within minutes, the waves washed the unconscious grandfather and child ashore, Montgomery said. Bystanders and paramedics, who arrived quickly, began CPR.

The two were loaded into an ambulance and taken to hospital where they were later pronounced dead.

Bechard cautions lake swimmers to be wary of undertows that are created by large waves, particularly in areas like this that are fully exposed to the lake.

“It looks fun but it can be dangerous,” he said.

It is too early to make a decision on an inquest, Bechard said.
</div>
