---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20100607/"
title: "__Whig20100607"

---

##Author pans city over treatment of its shorelineBy IAN ELLIOT



When author Ron Brown looks at Kingston's waterfront, he sees "the catastrophe on the Cataraqui."

His new book,From Queenston to Kingston -- The Hidden Heritage of Lake Ontario's Shorelineis a look at the long-standing connection to the shoreline and the lake -- and how in many cases, that connection is a tenuous one, now hidden behind a wall of hotels and condos that sprang up in the 1970s and 1980s.

In his view, Kingston is a prime example of how not to treat a shoreline.

"It would have been nice if Kingston had been able to retain a little more of its waterfront," said Brown, who walked towns from Niagara to Kingston to put together the book.

Brown, who has written 20 books of local history covering subjects from local jails to back-road journeys to railway stations, was born in Kingston and grew up here and said this city is not alone in walling off its waterfront.

He notes that in 1981, the city's official plan called for the preservation of the waterfront as "one of the greatest assets of Kingston" but in practice, planners and politicians of the time allowed a wall of tall buildings to cut off the view of it.

Brown notes that pattern in many of the towns and cities around Lake Ontario, but praises cities and towns such as Hamilton, Burlington and Port Credit, who have made an effort to both revitalize and open up their historic waterfronts to citizens.

His book is an attempt to rediscover that shoreline, which he notes was the lifeline of many of the towns in the age of ships and but which has been neglected in the age of highways.

The book is full of little-known facts. For instance, Ontario's first hanging took place in Bath, where a man was tried in Finkle's Tavern, found guilty and then strung up on a stout tree nearby. Finkle's Tavern is long gone but a plaque still marks its site.

The book also takes a fond look at Deseronto, Adolphustown, Napanee and Prince Edward County. Its look at Kingston features examination of the hamlets that made up the city, including Barriefield, Portsmouth and the Beechgrove complex on King Street West.

Brown says that collection of buildings, the biggest of which is the old limestone mental hospital known as Rockwood, "represents one of the finest collections of private and institutional heritage structures, not just on the lake but in the province."

Brown says besides walking the towns, he also tapped into the many local histories that have been published.

"The interesting thing is that you can do three-quarters of the research for a book like this on Google," he said.

"There are so many good local histories online, some excellent resources put together by people who really know their stuff."

He says people are passionate about the histories of their towns, something he discovered anew when he started poking around the historical record.

"I really wanted to emphasize what you can find along the shoreline because there are some amazing stories there."



Article ID# 2610989
