---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20080918/"
title: "__Whig20080918"

---

##Shorelines awash with volunteers###Annual cleanup in its 15th year

By JENNIFER PRITCHETT WHIG STANDARD ENVIRONMENT REPORTER

A stroll along the western bank of the Rideau River is a walk that's regularly strewn with garbage and debris.

Located a stone's throw from Kingston's downtown core, this expanse of not-so-pristine shoreline stretches from Douglas Fluhrer Park off Wellington Street through the Davis Tannery property - one of Kingston's most polluted sites - all the way up past the city-owned Belle Park golf course and north toward Highway 401.

While much of that shoreline isn't accessible to the public, many of the parts that are will be visited by teams of volunteers that will pick up the trash that litters the area this month.

The western bank of the Rideau River is one of six shoreline locations in Kingston that volunteers taking part in the TD Great Canadian Shoreline Cleanup will tackle in the coming days.

The national event is being held from Sept. 20 to 28.

"People are welcome to drop in [to help]," said Hailey Miles, a Torontobased spokeswoman for the event.

The Great Canadian Shoreline Cleanup, in its 15th year, was started in 1994 when a group of staff and volunteers at the Vancouver Aquarium went down to the shoreline and started picking up litter. By 2002, with the help of TD Canada, it was nationwide.

In Kingston, this year's cleanup will be held on three different days, the first of which will take place Sunday.

Volunteers will focus their efforts on various locations along the west bank of the Rideau River, at the Collingwood Street and King Street pier, as well as at Breakwater Park and Macdonald Park on Sunday.

Additional teams of volunteers will pick up garbage at Dead Man's Bay on Tuesday, at Lake Ontario Park on Thursday, and around Paterson Park on Monday, Sept. 29.

Each site has a co-ordinator who's organizing the cleanup.

Last year, 85 volunteers picked up trash at four different sites over five kilometres in Kingston. They picked up 43 bags of waste that weighed 267 kilograms.

Across the country in 2007, as many as 52,263 volunteers cleaned up 1,240 sites and picked up a total of 87,489 kilograms of garbage. They covered 1,772 kilometres and collected 13,473 bags of trash.

The most common items found during last year's cleanup were cigarette butts (270,756), food wrappers and containers (106,139), bags (79,646), lids (55,050), beverage cans (36, 631) and bottles (31,732).

Among the unusual items volunteers collected in last year's national campaign were a motorcycle, a laptop computer, a '70s-style TV, bicycles, costume fairy wings, a hammock and a pregnancy test.

So far, 61,000 volunteers have signed up to take up in this year's cross-country cleanup.

For more information about the TD Great Canadian Shoreline Cleanup, those interested in taking part can call 1-877-427-2422,or one of the local co-ordinators, Serge Landry, at 541-6000, ext. 3664. Volunteers can also go to www.vanaqua.org/cleanup.



The Green File
Article ID# 1205721

