---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20080917/"
title: "__Whig20080917"

---

##Lake Ontario water flow plan sunk###Joint commission succumbs to public demands for a different strategy

By GREG PEKERENBOOM, OSPREY NEWS NETWORK



An international proposal to restrict water flow from Lake Ontario is being sent back to the drawing board.

The International Joint Commission has bowed to public pressure and is abandoning its proposal, called Plan 2007.

"There was little support for regulation [of] Plan 2007," stated a letter from the commission to Canadian Foreign Affairs Minister David Emerson and U. S. Secretary of State Condoleeza Rice, citing complaints during recent public hearings and submissions to the commission this summer.

"There was also a broad, strong interest in returning to more natural flows," the letter reads.

"The regulation of water levels and flows should be based on a revised set of goals and objectives and criteria, specifically towards more natural flows to benefit the environment, while respecting other interests."

Environmentalists have stressed the importance of improving wetland conditions along the river.

A lower water level would also force marina operators to dredge their harbours at a heavy price.

River flow at a natural pace would also benefit hydroelectric generation and shipping, according to the commission.

At loggerheads were recreational boaters and cottagers from along the south shore of Lake Ontario who want ed the levels raised.

The commission's comments in the wake of the cancellation are similar to the so-called Plan B-plus, which was favoured by local environmentalists, cottagers and marine operators.

Plan B-plus called for higher water levels in the river and was one of three original proposals created by the commission after an exhaustive seven-year, $20-million study.

Coming to grips with the diverse views would have been a decision worthy of Solomon, said Elaine Kennedy, chair of the Cornwall and District Environment Committee. Kennedy had favoured Plan B-plus originally as a member of the group that studied the issue, but settled on Plan 2007 as a compromise.

Now the commission has asked the Canadian and U. S. governments, along with their Ontario, Quebec and New York state counterparts, to participate in the next step.

The commission hopes government representatives will join its staff on a small working group by the end of this month.

"The group would advise [the commission] on a regulation package, in combination with mitigation and adaptive management measures, that would meet a raised set of goals, objectives and criteria, and also be mutually acceptable to [all governments and the commission],"Kennedy said.

The commission hopes the study group can prepare a package to be submitted to the governments by June 2009.

The timetable has also taken into account the concurrent federal elections in Canada and the U. S.

Kennedy speculated that a change of government might result in the appointment of new commissioners - a prospect that could delay completion of a new plan.


- Cornwall Standard-Freeholder

