---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20081011/"
title: "__Whig20081011"

---

##City's sunken treasure###UNFINISHED BUSINESS
By PAUL SCHLIESMANN

<div class="column2">


The waters off Kingston are fabled for marine disasters. Dozens of shipwrecks dot Lake Ontario's murky floor, each with its own tale of suffering and doom.

There's a modern story that also haunts Kingston's maritime history - that of the dashed hopes of the Marine Museum of the Great Lakes. Just when that unfortunate episode appeared to be resting peacefully in some bureaucratic Davy Jones locker, a ghostly hull came skulking into Kingston's harbour last week, stirring up unpleasant memories.

John d'Esterre first noticed the odd-shaped vessel tied up at a Kingston pier. Coming to the city on one of his regular runs from Garden Island, d'Esterre thought it was just another barge hauling equipment to Wolfe Island for the windmill project.

As he got closer, he noticed the ornamental bowsprit and angled stern.

"I started to ask around," said d'Esterre. An inquiry to Maurice Smith at the marine museum revealed it to be the unfinished hull of the replica tall ship HMS Detroit, bound for the U. S. Atlantic coast.

A decade ago, the ship was conceived as a tourism draw by the people of Amherstburg, Ont., near Windsor. At the time, that project was competing with Kingston's marine museum for funding through the federal government's Canada Millennium Partnership Program.

Kingston never saw any money and the dream of a new interpretive centre and restoring the historic drydock was scuttled.

Amherstburg got its $700,000 for the HMS Detroit, of which $537,000 was spent -for nothing, as it turned out, but an unfinished hull.

*

The year was 1998, and the Canada Millennium Partnership Program, brainchild of Jean Chretien's Liberal government, grew to become a $158- million treasure chest to support "programs and projects of lasting impact into the next millennium."

The staff and directors at Kingston's Marine Museum of the Great Lakes saw the fund as a perfect opportunity to kick its proposed heritage centre into gear.

A report was produced in 1999, the designs calling for a two-storey glass-and- steel interpretation centre at the head of the drydock. Standing on the floor of the pumped-out drydock, visitors would watch a big-screen presentation, after which the screen would slide back, allowing them to walk into the drydock and under the massive hull of the Alexander Henry Coast Guard ship.

"It would become a marine-themed hub of the waterfront," recalled Mark Siemons, who had just joined the museum board and today is its chair.

Continued After Advertisement Below

Advertisement

Also part of the plan was a waterfront park with shops and restaurants to be built on the pier to the south of the drydock, as well as an extended pier where visiting cruise ships could dock.

Walking around the site last week, Siemons recalled the plans.

"Picture hundreds of wealthy European tourists in downtown Kingston with money to spend but no transportation," he said. "They could take a shuttle downtown. You could have water taxis going from here to Fort Henry.

"We're trying to champion the development of this site for the good of downtown Kingston. It's all part of our cultural identity."

The federal millennium fund was meant to promote precisely that kind of community project -the cost to be shared three ways among Ottawa, the city and the museum. With the cost of the project estimated at $3.4 million, that would be approximately $1.1 million for each partner.

On the cusp of the new millennium the museum, backed by the city and Liberal MP Peter Milliken, submitted its proposal to the federal government.

The fund was headed by legendary Windsor MP Herb Gray, who was also deputy prime minister at the time.

Liberal MPs, cabinet ministers -often Gray himself -were always on hand to dole out the booty. Over several years, millions of dollars were given to hundreds of community projects, some big and some small, from coast to coast. They included $81,600 for the Canadian Museum of Flight in Langley, B. C., $896,667 for the Fort Calgary National Historic Site and $1.057 million to the Canadian Canoe Museum in Peterborough. The Kingston request was certainly not the most exorbitant.

In the first year of the grant program, the little town of Amherstburg, Ont., in the riding of Liberal MP Susan Whelan -daughter of former Liberal cabinet minister Eugene Whelan - scored a major coup. Gray announced a $700,000 millennium grant enabling the historic naval town on Lake Erie, just south of his own riding, to build a steel-hulled tall ship. It would be a replica of the HMS Detroit, captured by the Americans in the War of 1812.

The little municipality pledged $710,000, a hefty bet on its future tourism industry.

The Amherstburg project failed by degrees, running out of funds after $537,000 of the millennium money was spent and the town lost the $710,000 investment it had pledged. With money still owed to the shipbuilders and the storage yard, the hull was sold to a consortium in Newport. It left Amherstburg on Sept. 3 behind a tugboat.

"That's a really interesting story for Kingston," said Alan Grant, who, as marine museum board chair led the millennium application in 1998. "If we lost out to the hulk at the foot of Johnston Street, that would be ironic."

Meantime, Kingston's tale of the millennium grant has become almost legendary in local marine circles. Most recall that the museum proposal had been "shortlisted." Some think it lost directly to the ill-fated HMS Detroit project.

"We ended up getting nothing," recalled Grant. "Herb Gray was supposed to give us something. We were right out to lunch for whatever political reasons.

"All I know is we got nothing out of the feds. It was explained that one federal department could not grant funds to another. That was the explanation as I understood it."

*

John d'Esterre is impressed by what the Amherstburg shipbuilders managed to accomplish.

"If Kingston's waterfront were fixed up, that ship sitting there as a tourist attraction would be worth a bloody fortune," he said.

But Kingston won't get the ship -like its predecessor, the new HMS Detroit is lost to the Americans -but there is renewed hope in Kingston that a deal may be struck enabling the city to finally take control of the historic drydock, designated a national historic site in 1986, and the land around it, from Public Works.

Grant and Siemons are hoping the federal government will announce as early as December that it will fix up the crumbling drydock and breakwater and turn it all over to Kingston -for $1.

After years of municipal-federal wrangling, they say the intervention of Senator Hugh Segal with his own Conservative government has made the difference. As Siemons described it, Segal sits in the Senate next to Michael Fortier, who was appointed public works minister by Prime Minister Stephen Harper. That meant Segal regularly had Fortier's undivided attention on the marine museum file.

"With the help of Senator Segal and public works, this is being treated as special property," said Siemons. "We have a direct line between the museum board and the minister of public works.

"We believe public works is operating in very good faith. They want to come up with a permanent solution for the site. The difference today from 10 years ago is now we've got the federal government onside."

With the renewed hope for federal assistance, marine museum directors are excited about reviving their dream of a Great Lakes Maritime Heritage Centre.

"A hundred years from now, the K-Rock Centre will be gone. But you'll have City Hall and the drydock property," said Siemons. "This will be drawing people for decades. If council builds that deepwater dock, that would drive everything."

D'Esterre, who has spent thousands of dollars of his own money on paint for the Alexander Henry and hundreds of hours painting it, said the 10-year delay resulting from the millennium fund rejection is "not good."

"The marine museum was trying to get the waterfront cleaned up and get a dock for tour boats," he said. "The job would have been done by now. You could have a waterfront you'd really be proud of."
</div>

Article ID# 1243727
