---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20080201/"
title: "__Whig20080201"

---

##Waterfront sculptures pass muster as good public art

On the Kingston waterfront, near the water purification plant, there is a fine sculpture named Time. Made for the city's 300th anniversary celebrations in 1973 by sculptor Kosso Eloul, it consists of two large silvery metal beams tilted over as if they were sundials or the bowsprits of two boats passing. The beams are square in section, and each sits comfortably on a concrete base shaped like the bow of a ship.

Although some repairs are needed, the whole sculpture looks almost as good now as it did when it was installed. It has served as a background for dance and theatre, a playground setting for children's games and a place for student gatherings on warm spring days. It attracts people by its grace and sense of belonging in that place. It has become a background to life itself, a natural part of the waterfront that we have grown used to seeing.

Further to the east along the waterfront, there is another sculpture called Pollution, also made for the 1973 hoopla by sculptor Evon Cozic. Set on a mound of earth, there are two large concrete pipes set at an angle, and from within the pipes comes a stream of polluting sludge oozing out across the grass toward the water. Nasty stuff. A nasty reminder of what was common 35 years ago.

There have been complaints about that sculpture ever since it was installed. There was an initial burst of letters in the Whig-Standard, and then it was defaced when students carefully painted the two pipes to look like pop cans. Some people thought the decoration improved the look of the pipes, but the police took an interest, as there was no question it came under the heading of graffiti or even vandalism. The paint was removed shortly after, but many people were still unhappy because they wanted the concrete pipes taken away as well.

The protests grew fainter as time went on. The two pipes, now painted a tactful green, and the faded red-and-yellow concrete sludge, have become an accepted part of the waterfront scene, attracting little public comment. Children play in the pipes, just as they do around Time.

A bit further east, on the edge of a parking lot, there is a big steel pipe sticking out of the ground. It seems to be an air vent. It is curved over like the top of a walking stick or a candy cane, and might be mistaken for another piece of sculpture. It is not a beautiful thing, but is big enough to fit well into that broad and open landscape. It was installed when a huge overflow tank was built underneath the parking lot a few years ago to prevent the sewage overflows that used to foul the waterfront after heavy downpours.

So the curved pipe is closely related to the Pollution sculpture, because it is part of the engineering works needed to reduce actual pollution of the St. Lawrence river. We can think of the two together as a reminder to be thankful for money and effort spent to deal with water pollution. The sculpture has survived decades of controversy, and continues to remind us that pollution problems do not go away easily.

But it is a pity the curved pipe is so prominent along that waterfront path, where there could be a real sculpture, perhaps a bronze figure of a 17thcentury explorer looking toward Lake Ontario, or a native person from a much earlier time, or a modern-day board sailor in wetsuit ready to go out on the water in an autumn gale. Perhaps we could have another beautiful cast-iron lion like the one that faces the Newlands pavilion, or an intriguing abstract piece.

In their own ways, both Time and Pollution are effective in what they set out to do, one because it is so attractive and is enjoyed by many people, the other because it reminds us of an important subject and has generated a lot of controversy. Good public art does all those things.

- Julian Brown is a retired Queen's University professor of chemistry, and is a co-founder of The Kingston Prize, Canada's national portrait competition. He is active in the Kingston Arts Council.
