---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20080610a/"
title: "__Whig20080610a"

---

##City sailors are Bermuda bound###Successful return trip would qualify boat for France to Brazil solo race
BY ANGELA HICKMAN

Nathan Baron may have heard the stories, but he said sailing toward the Bermuda Triangle isn't something he's afraid of.

Yesterday, Baron and Greg van Rossem set sail for Maryland, where they will then take part in the 1,175-kilometre Bermuda Ocean Race.

Baron said their conservative time-line to sail from Maryland to Bermuda is about a week.

"We're budgeting about seven to eight days, if we're lucky," he said. "Hopefully, it'll be a little faster than that."

Wind speed and wave conditions will be the major time factors, Baron said.

"The weather conditions are generally the most volatile factor in the whole thing," he said, adding that low-pressure systems and huge waves can

be quite dangerous on a 21-foot yacht.

But Baron said he and van Rossem will use their shortwave radio and special storm sails to prepare for any inclement weather.

"We follow the weather very, very carefully," he said. "We'll be constantly adjusting the sails to match the wind conditions."

Although van Rossem will sail to Bermuda with Baron, the real challenge will be the return trip, which Baron will make alone.

"The big component of this race is the qualifying part after the race," he said.

If he is able to complete the return trip, Baron will qualify for next spring's Mini Transat, a solo race from La Rochelle, France, to Salvador, Brazil.

Although most offshore races allow racers to use Internet and satellite communications and navigation, the Mini Transat doesn't, so Baron said he will be practising his use of both the sextant, a navigational instrument, and the shortwave radio during the Bermuda Ocean Race.

Baron said that, although he has been sailing for 20 years, he's still an amateur. He said he started his campaign in February 2007 and trains about 40 hours a week. This campaign will end after he has completed the Mini Transat in November 2009.

On top of his busy training and work schedules, Baron has also dedicated time every week to spend with Kingston's Boys and Girls Club. In fact, he's become so involved with the club he named his yacht "Boys and Girls of Canada."

Baron said he initially got involved with the club as a one-time thing when his friend asked him to do a talk about sailing.

Baron said working with the kids has become important to him.

"I'm there as much as I can [be]," he said. "It's turned in to a really good relationship."

Baron said working with the club allows him to give back to the communitythathassupportedhim andhissailing endeavours.

"You can see as soon as you walk in the club what a difference it makes in the community," he said, adding that the support the club offers to both parents and their children is indispensible.

Baron said although he talks to the kids about sailing and teaches them things about navigation, mostly he's teaching them about leadership.

"Those kids are a little bit 'high risk,' " he said. " They're strong individuals with tons of potential, they just need strong role models. I'm just trying to keep up my end of the bargain."

