---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20080820/"
title: "__Whig20080820"

---

##'They were the best of pals'###Eight-year-old boy and his 'Poppy' drown in Lake Ontario

By ROB TRIPP
<div class="column2">

Lexus Curry, a nine-year-old ball of freckles and shoulder-length, reddish-brown hair, dressed in white flip-flops and a yellow T-shirt, points about 30 metres out into the calm water of Lake Ontario, near the pebbly shoreline where she swam Monday with her brother, her eight-year-old cousin Josh and "Poppy Don," as they called him.

"It took Josh out to there," she says, with childhood precision. "To where the dark water was."

Poppy Don - 67-year-old Don Harper - went into the water after Josh to rescue him from "it."

He could not.

"It," Lexus believes, was an undertow that snatched away her playmate and friend and the man that Josh considered his grandfather.

Josh and Don Harper died Monday night at Kingston General Hospital when family consented to turn off life support.

Kingston's regional coroner has taken charge of the investigation into the double drowning that has shattered two families.

Lexie, as she's known to friends and family, and seven-year-old sibling Hayden don't have to wait for the investigation. They recall, with frightening clarity, what happened.

Yesterday, their father, Mark Venton, took them back to the stretch of beach to come to terms with the event.

They had been at Paterson Park, at the foot of Sunny Acres Road, for about 10 minutes Monday afternoon, cooling themselves in the spray and the water on a day when brisk lake breezes churned waves to a metre or more.

They were a group of five - the three children, Harper and his longtime companion, Bonnie Stormont, Josh's grandmother.

Josh was the only child of Stormont's daughter, Lisa Venton of Kingston.

Lexus and Hayden, who live in Trenton, were visiting.

"We went out a little, about to our knees and Josh starting freaking out and I started pulling on him but the undertow took him out more and I went in [to shore] and got Poppy," Lexie said.

Harper plunged in after the struggling boy, who was being carried into deep water and was swamped by the waves.

After a few minutes, Lexie said she could see only Poppy's head, bobbing occasionally in the waves, far from shore.

"And they drowned," said Hayden, punctuating his sister's tale.

The children were asked if they were afraid.

"Yeah, a little," said Lexie. "She was bawling," said Hayden. Neither had seen someone die before.

"No, not really," said Hayden.

Joshua, they said, was not a good swimmer.

"He never took swimming lessons," Lexie said.

Stormont said they had been to this spot many times before, although she hadn't seen weather like that before.

"As we were walking down, I said to Don, 'Look at the big waves,' " Stormont said in an interview yesterday. The water was a dirty brown colour.

She said Harper, a lifeguard as a teenager, was still a strong swimmer, despite his age. He did not hesitate to plunge into the water after Josh.

"He could see Josh flailing his arms and the waves would come up over his head," said Stormont, who does not consider herself a strong swimmer.

"There were times when you would see both their heads and then you wouldn't see either one of them for about a minute or two because the waves were just overwhelming and the current had carried them eastward."

Stormont and other people at the beach realized Harper was in trouble, too.

"We tried to swim out, but the waves were just so so strong and big, there was no way you could do it," she said. "You'd go out maybe five or six feet and the wave would just push you right back into shore."

Within a few minutes, the waves carried Harper and Josh back to shore. Neither was breathing.

A bystander began performing CPR on Josh.

Lexus and Hayden watched.

"Poppy Don wasn't puking water like Josh," said Hayden.

Stormont said a man helped her drag Harper out of the water.

"I tried to give Don CPR, but I knew at that point it was senseless," she said.

She is amazed that he was able to reach Joshua.

"I know that because of the love that he had for Joshua, that he would do anything and he did, he gave his own life for the little boy," she said. "They were the best of pals, those two."

Stormont and other family members describe a powerful bond between the senior and the boy that was not bred of blood.

Joshua's biological father has not been in his life for years.

When Harper and Stormont's relationship grew, Harper doted on Josh, becoming a grandfatherly figure who filled a father's shoes.

"Don delighted in having him around," Stormont said.

"They were like shadows, one was attached to the other one's hip sort of thing," she said.

Harper lived near Joshua and the youngster, who loved his bicycle, would find excuses to ride to Poppy's place.

He'd claim his tire needed air, Stormont recalled.

"You could almost call them soulmates," Mark Venton said.

Joshua was about to enter Grade 3 at Centennial Public School.

"He was so proud that he was going into Grade 3," Stormont said.

She described him as a typical boy, active and someone who liked to tease others.

He liked Batman, had taken martial arts classes and had endured difficulty in life.

He and his mother were both seriously hurt when they were struck by a car while walking on Princess Street five years ago.

Stormont, who has lost a partner and a grandson, has not yet come to terms with Monday's events.

"It's certainly heartwrenching," she said. "I don't think I've come to grips with most of it yet. I think it's going to take a while. My daughter's even more devastated. Joshua was her only child."

Harper leaves behind five siblings in the area in a sprawling Kingston family.

"Donny was easygoing and he loved kids," said Elmer Harper, 75, one of two surviving brothers from a clan that once numbered a dozen siblings.

Don Harper owned and operated taxi cabs in Kingston for at least 30 years, most of that time with the Modern cab company.

He was forced to retire several years ago, his brother said, because of glaucoma.

Sister Judy Berry of Odessa called her brother a "good person" who liked music and liked to play the guitar.

He loved swimming, she said.

In recognition of his bond with Joshua, there will be joint visitation for both victims at the Paul Payne Funeral Home in Odessa, from 11 a. m. to 2 p. m. and from 7 to 9 p. m. tomorrow.

A joint funeral service will be held Friday at Emmanuel United Church in Odessa beginning at 11 a. m.

Autopsies were expected to be completed yesterday.

"We're just in the infancy of the investig ation," coroner Dr. Benoit Bechard said.

Bechard said he cautions lake swimmers to be wary of undertows, which are created by large waves, particularly in areas like Paterson Park that are fully exposed.

Waves and wind that push between Amherst and Simcoe islands, an area known as the Gap, can create very dangerous conditions.

The Gap is just south of Paterson Park, a municipal property maintained by the City of Kingston.

Although signs warning dog owners to clean up after their pets are prominently displayed at the entrance to their park, there are no signs cautioning park users about dangerous swimming conditions.

Yesterday, Mark Venton brought his children to the awful spot "in case they wanted to talk about it," but also to retrieve something.

He pointed to a waist-high shrub about five metres from the weed-matted shoreline.

Venton clutched a patterned, blue-and- white man's shirt. Don Harper's shirt had been left dangling from that shrub for 24 hours, since Harper placed it there Monday.

In the frenzy of the day's events, the shirt was left behind, forgotten.

"It was still here," Venton said. He plucked it from the frail twig and carried off the only visible reminder of a calamity that won't be forgotten.
</div>

