---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20111001/"
title: "__Whig20111001"

---

##Council faces million dollar question
By Paul Schliesmann




Kingston city councillors will be asked on Tuesday to approve the $1-million purchase of 30.8 acres of land along Collins Creek.

The property is part of the Cataraqui West subdivision development that will see about 3,000 homes built in the area.

According to the city's own planning guidelines, the open tract of treed land with its "significant wetlands" cannot be developed.

Negotiations between city staff and a consortium of five property owners have been going on for several years, a process that began under the previous city council.

The property owners include Braebury Homes, Tamarack Corporation, CARFA Group, HTH Realties Inc. and Tamarack held in trust for the Shriners.

The two sides recently settled on the price which works out to $34,333 an acre.

Subdivision developers are required to donate 5% of their land to the city for active parkland space.

The 30.8-acre property, a swath of land 110 metres wide running north from Princess Street to Creekford Road on the east side of Collins Creek, is not included in that alotment.

"This is where we're getting into a land acquisition above and beyond parkland dedication," said community services commissioner Lanie Hurdle, who is bringing the report to council on Tuesday.

She described the 30.8 acres as "basically woodlands that need to be maintained under city ownership."

Some municipalities pay far less, if anything at all, for open lands.

"We don't pay for things we can get for free," said Chris Gosselin, the manager of environment planning for the Waterloo Region. "If a block of significant land can be donated without cost, why would we pay for it? I can't remember when we've purchased a natural area."

Gosselin said the feeling among most developers is that land they can't build on becomes a financial liability as well as a safety hazard, particularly if there is a body of water involved.

As a result, he said, Waterloo region has received whole forest tracts "as more or less a gift through dedication."

"The developers have already made their profit," he said, adding that lots backing onto publicly reserved spaces also garner premium prices on the real estate market.

The City of Waterloo, meantime, will pay for environmental land, but not at the rate Kingston offers.

It has capped its per-acre payment at $2,650.

If Waterloo were purchasing the Collins Creek property the bill would be less than $80,000, not $1 million.

"Twenty-odd years ago, we tried to gain as much through the application process as we can," said Waterloo director of policy development Scott Nevin.

Acquisition of public land is rolled into the application process for developers.

Nevin said land owners know the terms offered by the city upfront when they purchase land for future development.

"We were buying properties at different prices. Typically, we were able to maintain that policy at $2,650," said Nevin.

"It continues to work. Developers don't want to own any rim parcels of land. They don't want it so much."

Kingston's policy for land acquisitions requires independent appraisals be undertaken.

Hurdle said she couldn't reveal the appraisal numbers from the Collins Creek deal because the negotiations took place in camera, as allowed by provincial law.

The city would take $885,000 out of its parkland acquisition capital fund and $145,000 from the parkland/natural land reserve fund to make the purchase.

The city's two most recent land purchases were in 2007 when it bought 45 acres adjacent to Grass Creek Park for $800,000, and 12 acres along Butternut Creek in the Greenwood Park subdivision for $600,000.



pschliesmann@thewhig.com

Article ID# 3319076
