---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20110623/"
title: "__Whig20110623"

---

##Company shows its mettle
By MICHAEL LEA

<div class="column2">

Local businesses must love it these days when they look out their windows and see John Gerretsen walking up to their front door.

Last week, the Kingston and the Islands MPP brought a grant of more than $111,000 to Eikon Device to help with that company's expansion.

On Thursday, he showed up at <a href="http://metalcraftmarine.com">MetalCraft Marine</a> with more money, to help the boat-building firm with its plans to expand markets and possibly double its production.

Apparently more is to come.

The money comes from the Eastern Ontario Development Fund, through which the provincial government subsidizes 10% to 15% of project costs to help firms expand.

"When the private entre - preneur wants to put their money into (expansion) and invest and take the risks and all the responsibilities that comes along with it, then we as a government want to contribute to that, to show the faith that we have in that company," Gerretsen said.

"Of course, what we're mainly interested in is to make sure that jobs come out of these kinds of investments."

MetalCraft Marine got $417,409 to go towards a $4.17-million expansion project. It has already hired 20 new people.

"This is a fantastic business," Gerretsen said as he announced the grant in front of the company's 100 workers Thursday morning.

He noted the list of international destinations to which MetalCraft Marine has supplied its aluminum boats.

"You are ambassadors of this community when you produce the kind of product that you produce," he told the workers.

"To think that this facility could have been gone in one of the proposals that came before the City of Kingston a number of years ago is almost unthinkable."

Gerretsen was alluding to the original suggestion that the new large venue entertainment centre be built on MetalCraft's current site.

Tom Wroe, president of Metal- Craft Marine Inc., said the company started making aluminum boats in 1987 and by 1991 had annual sales of $236,000.

Its main line became fireboats, some of which have been sold in the U.S. and abroad.

"A couple of times we got to $5 million in annual revenue and just kind of stalled out there," he said. "We had a hard time getting past that."

He said the staff at MetalCraft were boatbuilders, not managers or salesmen, and so were limited on the management side of business.

"The majority of us get our hands dirty," he said, "so we had a real bad, near-death experience in 2002. We nearly went out of business.

"Fortunately, we made it through that."

Wroe said the owners were tempted to sell the business in 2009 but decided to stick it out and try to expand.

The company works out of five shops -- three in the city, a new research and development centre on Wolfe Island, and a facility in Clayton, N.Y., which handles production not permitted in Canada.

"We would like to consolidate here and have much better manufacturing space."

This expansion would allow the company to do that, he said.

The company made a grant application in November and it is now about 20% of the way through the process, Wroe said.

"It's very exciting. We are on the growth spiral and have to keep going," he said.

The original plan was to erect a new, 5,000-sq.-foot building, but Wroe said the company may decide to enlarge the existing Wellington Street buildings instead.

He said markets for the boats may be shifting and he wants MetalCraft to respond to those changes.

Many of the fireboats they build for the United States are supported by grants from that country and Wroe sees that decreasing due to the financial problems in the U.S.

"But there is a worldwide market for aluminum boats," he said. "It's the most efficient way to move people across the water. So we think that's going to grow."

Wroe cited his company's construction of workboats for the Panama Canal as an example.

"Now we need a much stronger sales and marketing force. We've got the capacity now, we're getting lean, we're cutting back on our expenses."

He said the company will also put more effort into designing and preparing the boats for construction so that a minimum amount of time is spent on the manufacturing floor.

</div>

mlea@thewhig.com

