---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20080317/"
title: "__Whig20080317"

---

##Raw sewage dumping decreases; Upgrades to system credited for drop
By Jennifer Pritchett

Kingston's sewer system is likely more environmentally friendly in 2008 than at any other point since it first brought running water and flushing toilets to city residents in the late 1800s.

That's because roughly $160 million in upgrades over the past seven years have drastically reduced the amount of raw sewage Kingston discharges into Lake Ontario and other local waterways, says a new report.

Last year, the city discharged 89 million litres of untreated waste, compared to more than 280 million litres in 2006.

Jim Keech, president of Utilities Kingston, attributed the decline to the completion of several major sewage system upgrades, including the new sewer pipe under the Cataraqui River, a boost to the pumping capacity at the River Street station and an extra sewage storage facility underneath Emma Martin Park.

"When you put all this together, it really helps us manage the system," he said.

Keech will present the report's findings to council at its regular meeting at City Hall tomorrow night.

Kingston's longstanding practice of intentionally sending raw waste into the Cataraqui River, Lake Ontario and other waterways is linked to the city's old-fashioned sewage system that becomes overloaded during heavy rain. Its combined sewer pipes, which carry both runoff from roads and raw sewage, can't get the waste to the Ravensview treatment plant fast enough.

In order to prevent the refuse from backing up in people's basements and toilets, the system is designed to purge the overflow into local waterways.

The report outlines how the majority of the water pollution, which includes human excrement and road runoff, comes from pipes within the sewage system that the city didn't start monitoring until midway through 2006.

Of the 89 million litres that went into the waterway in 2007, 85.4 million litres came from the pipes that weren't monitored before 2006. Just 3.6 million litres were discharged from pumping stations. Similarly in 2006, 139.4 million litres came from the previously untracked pipes, compared to 140.6 million litres from the pumping stations.

Prior to mid-2006, the city only monitored the untreated waste that came from the city's seven pumping stations.

About 18 months ago, the city installed new equipment at 11 of the combined sewer manholes that direct the foul liquid into the watercourse.

These ultrasonic devices, which cost about $10,000, have enabled Utilities Kingston staff to collect data on the amount of untreated waste that goes into the waterway from pipes that were previously unmonitored.

The equipment measures the amount of liquid moving out of the pipe into the waterway.

As a result of the devices revealing that these pipes are a major portion of the liquid waste the city directs to watercourses, the municipality is looking at ways to prevent the waste from ending up in the waterway. The city is investigating the possibility of installing storage tanks at several locations in order to trap the waste during heavy rain.

Another solution may be to expand the size of the sewers in those areas in order to enable the waste water to flow more easily to the treatment plant.

Still, as many as 18 of those pipes remain unmonitored.

"Though we have relocated a couple [of the devices] to some of the 18 where there wasn't any," said Keech. "I don't think we're planning on purchasing any more. We're just looking at the results from the ones that are being monitored and then, as we deal with them, move the other monitors to the other ones."

Keech said that work will continue over the coming five years or so. He said the work on Kingston's sewer system is far from being done. Despite the pricey improvements to the system, Keech said weather will continue to play a significant role in how easily the waste is managed.

"I would say that we're a little nervous if you look at all the snow that's around now, if we end up with a heavy rainfall," he said. "Yes, it will be interesting to see how the system works."

jpritchett@thewhig.com

