---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20100617/"
title: "__Whig20100617"

---

##Big plans in store for CORK
By DOUG GRAHAM

<div class="column2">

With the Optimist North American championship set to launch out of Portsmouth Olympic Harbour in less than two weeks, it will mark the beginning of a yearly plan to have major regattas every July in Kingston.

In fact, it would be a three-month sailing bonanza with the July events -- CORK Sail Kingston executive is looking at both a world championship and an International Sailing Association Federation world sailing championship in future summers -- followed every August by CORK and then the Olympic class fall regatta in September.

"Our goal is to have a major event every July, then CORK and the fall regatta,' said Marianne Davis, executive director of CORK Sail Kingston.

"That's the pattern we would like to follow."

The Canadian Olympic-training regatta at Kingston, heading into its 41st year in August, has been the centre jewel of the sailing season since it began in 1969, seven years prior to Kingston hosting the sailing events for Montreal's Summer Olympic Games in 1976.

Davis said that by book-ending CORK with a major championship in July and the fall regatta in September, it will further enhance Kingston's reputation as one of the top freshwater sailing venues in North America.

"That's the thing that really draws people here from other countries. A lot (of sailors) have been to Kingston or their parents have been here," Davis said.

"They remember good sailing conditions, the fresh water and good wind.

"Also (the city) is not too big and it is easy to get around Kingston. It all makes for a pretty good experience when (sailors) get here."

It will be the younger sailors, many accompanied by their parents, who will be experiencing sailing on Lake Ontario at the June 28 to July 3 Optimist North American championship.

The Optimist, because of its size -- 2.31 metres in length, 1.13 metres in width and weighing 35 kilograms -- is considered an ideal development dinghy for youngsters to learn their single-handed sailing skills.

It is regarded as safe and simple enough for an eight-year-old to sail but also technical enough for 15-year-olds to develop tactical race skills.

The North American championship, under the guidance of the International Optimist Dinghy Association, is limited to sailors 15 and under.

"It is the big one for this year for us because it is not only a North American championship but it is also an open class," Davis said.

"We will also have teams from South America, New Zealand, France and Japan."

The invitations for non-North American sailors to attend were based on those competitors having placed well in previous championships.

Among the Canadian Optimist 32-sailor group will be Berg Ellemers and Ross Murdoch, both based out of the Kingston Yacht Club.

Other countries include Argentina, Peru, Chile, Ecuador, Mexico, the Netherlands Antilles and Puerto Rico.

Davis said hosting the Optimist North American championship was attractive for a couple of reasons.

"First of all the Optimist class is really trying to develop in Canada. By supporting the youth development side of the class, we can inspire younger sailors," Davis said.

"It is also a really good way to showcase Kingston to this age group. When they go on to other boats later on there is a good chance they will be back to CORK in future years."

All the sailing over six days will be contested on the Alpha course, which is directly south of the Portsmouth Olympic Harbour.

As far as the future events go, Davis said Kingston is one of eight to ten venues bidding for the 2013 Radial Worlds.

The successful bid will be known in September.

CORK Sail Kingston is also working on a bid for the 2014 ISAF world sailing championship. The ISAF championship will run two years following the Summer Olympic Games in 2012 in London, England.

So instead of yearly world championships, the pattern will be the Olympic Games in 2012 and two years later the ISAF world championship, followed by the 2016 Olympic Games.

As far as CORK goes, it too has a revamped schedule in place for August.

The four-day CORK International Regatta, for youth and development classes, will take place on Aug. 16-19.

It will be followed by the Olympic classes from Aug. 21- 25.

Moved to the back, after years of trying it in mid-August, is the CORK offshore fleet. It will run Aug. 26-29.

In late September comes the fall regatta. It will involve important competition for Canadian sailors with the national teams in Laser and Radial being decided.

</div>

Article ID# 2626659
