---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20100723/"
title: "__Whig20100723"

---

###Letter to the Editor
##Derby format can harm bass population
<div class="column2">

With reference to the article about the Canadian Open Bass Classic in the July 17Whig-Standard by Doug Graham, I have a few comments.

First let me say that I served in the Canadian Army for over 38 years and I agree that supporting the Soldier On cause is commendable. On the other hand, holding the Canadian Open Bass Classic in Kingston is not all-good news for local anglers. The suggestion that because the fish are returned to Lake Ontario after they are weighed-in causes no negative impact on the bass fishery is misleading to say the least. I have been fishing the waters of this area since 1942 and have experienced a decline in the bass fishery after every tournament.
Some simple math will support my claim. The Canadian Open is a large tournament with a total of 160 entrants and each one is allowed to weigh five fish for each of the three days. The total bass relocated could be as much as 2,400 fish. Of course, the fish kept are the largest by weight. They are also the best fish we need to keep the bass population strong for future anglers. Add to this the unknown number of fish that are caught in one location and moved to another location many kilometres away, then released, because a larger fish replaces it in the live well.

This brings up another aspect of my claim that live release as practised by tournaments is harmful to the local bass fishery. I live on the St. Lawrence River west of Gananoque about 30 kilometres from Confederation Park in downtown Kingston. Many of the participants will be fishing in the waters around Gananoque and even many kilometres further east. The bass caught are placed in a live well for up to eight hours and subjected to much trauma as the boats move from location to location at speeds greater than 50 km/h. In the event of rough water the pounding the fish experience is even greater. This boat ride and the handling at the weigh-in causes the fish to be placed under a great deal of stress.

The live-release method used does not return the fish anywhere close to where they were caught. It also places to many fish in a small area. These two factors taken together have an impact on the following years spawn. Bass are territorial by nature and require a spawning bed in gravel to place their eggs. After the spawn the male guards the nest to keep predators away. If due to relocation they are unable to find a good spot in which to spawn, they will miss a year. This means there will be fewer bass in the future. A tournament held in a lake with well-defined boundaries does not have the same amount of negative impact as one that is held over a large area such as the St. Lawrence River and eastern Lake Ontario. Because of limitless boundaries this tournament will harm the area fishery by relocating a large numbers of bass from a vast area to a relatively small area near Kingston.

The bass fishery is further stressed by tournaments held yearly in Alexandria Bay, Clayton and Cape Vincent all located in New York State. Once again, the fish are taken in the same area waters and are handled, relocated and released near the tournament headquarters. Perhaps it is time for the Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources to get involved and exert some control over the misuse of a limited resource. Why not forgo the weigh-in show and release the fish where they were caught like most of us do.

</div>


Dan Spencer Gananoque


Article ID# 2681527

