---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20080902/"
title: "__Whig20080902"

---

##Control bylaw sought###Legislation would temporarily halt waterside development

By JORDAN PRESS
<div class="column2">

Development along Kingston's portion of the Rideau Canal should be put on hold until the city can find a way to protect the natural feel of the world heritage site, says one city councillor.

Councillor Vicki Schmolka says the city should not approve any new developments on the banks of the waterway, which includes the Cataraqui River, until it has the proper planning tools to preserve elements of the canal.

Without those tools, she said, it's possible that there could be development along the water's edge and the natural feel of the canal will be lost.

"This is to avoid having regrets," Schmolka said of her proposal before city council.

"We have to do it. We shouldn't dither around."

Schmolka is proposing the city enact something known as an interim control bylaw to give the city time to decide what kinds of development it will allow along the canal.

An interim control bylaw is a piece of municipal legislation that allows cities to prohibit developments, either general or specific, in an area for a short period of time while the municipality completes a planning study for the area.

"An interim control bylaw is a way to say let's put the brakes on this to see what we want along the Rideau water system," Schmolka said.

A proposal to jump-start development of an interim control bylaw is scheduled to go before councillors tonight. If approved, city staff would come back to council in two weeks with the bylaw ready to be enacted.

Her motion is the last of nine on the council agenda this week, following others that have not been debated for months because councillors have not been able to complete their agenda.

It's possible that any new legislation limiting development along the river and canal could have an impact on at least one major project the city is eyeing in the future - the third crossing of the Cataraqui River.

Schmolka said if the rules change, the city would have to look at how a new bridge would impact the heritage aspects of the canal.

The city is currently in the midst of a two-year study of the environmental impacts of any new crossing of the river. The study will recommend a location and type of crossing, which could include doing nothing at all.

If Schmolka's proposal for an interim control bylaw is ultimately approved, it would cover any new development within 120 metres of the high water mark of the river from the [[LaSalle Causeway]] to the northern boundary of the city. Council would have to approve any development applications in that area while an interim control bylaw is in place.

The prohibition wouldn't apply to any existing buildings along the canal, Schmolka said.
</div>

