---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20080610/"
title: "__Whig20080610"

---

##Society seeks name change for park
<h3>A BREAK FOR TRADITION? Lt.-Col. Bradstreet led about 3,000 soldiers in assault on Fort Frontenac</h3>

A long-forgotten figure in Kingston's early history could possibly earn a permanent space in the city by the end of the year.

The Kingston Historical Society has approached city hall with a proposal to rename Breakwater Park on the Lake Ontario waterfront after Lt.-Col. John Bradstreet, the British officer who led the battle to overthrow Fort Frontenac.

The battle took place 250 years ago this August and was the moment, the historical society says, that paved the way for United Empire Loyalists to move into Kingston years later and grow the city.

"There [have] been suggestions to

name something after Bradstreet for some time," said society president Ed Grenda.

"Nothing has been named after Bradstreet here and he plays a significant role in Kingston's early history."

The reason for the society's proposal to rename Breakwater Park after the British soldier is that it was the spot where Bradstreet mounted his invasion of Fort Frontenac, Grenda said.

Breakwater Park runs along the lakeshore south of Queen's University from the King Street water plant to Kingston General Hospital.

Bradstreet tried to persuade his superiors to launch an attack on Fort Frontenac two years before the actual attack took place 250 years ago. However, a series of command changes and British defeats pushed back the actual date of the attack.

On Aug. 25, 1758, Bradstreet and his force of about 3,000 soldiers landed at Breakwater Park and started their attack on the French fort. They occupied the area now known as Market Square and launched a sault on Fort Frontenac.

Bradstreet's biography in the online version of the Dictionary of Canadian Biography notes that Fort Frontenac "was in no condition to resist a siege," and two days after Bradstreet launched his attack, the fort surrendered.

"After plundering, burning and demolishing the fort, Bradstreet's force retreated to British territory," the entry reads. "With one brilliant stroke, the lifeline of the French Great Lakes empire had been severed. More directly, the capture of French provisions at the post, the destruction of the French naval flotilla on Lake Ontario, and the resultant blow to French prestige among the Indians all contributed to the final defeat of New France."

The defeat also allowed the Loyalists to come to Kingston and begin building the city years later, Grenda said.

Breakwater Park used to have a plaque commemorating the event, but, Grenda said, it was removed years ago after vandalism and is now in the city's hands.

A public symbol of Bradstreet's victory is visible on the side of the Hanson parking garage on Brock Street. Part of the mural showing the history of Kingston includes a section depicting Bradstreet and his defeat of Fort Frontenac.

The historical society first conceived the idea five years ago, but nothing ever materialized. The society revisited the idea at its annual general meeting this year and it met with approval, Grenda said.

If the park is renamed, Grenda said the society would also look to install a new plaque or sign outlining the historical significance of the park.

"It becomes a reference point with a heritage component,"Grenda said.

"Many individuals would welcome it. It's a reference to the past, especially to a figure who was almost virtually forgotten."

Bradstreet is seen as an enigmatic figure in Canada's history. Little is known about his early years, except that he kept his Acadian ancestry largely to himself.

He was involved in a number of schemes that didn't always endear him to his commanding officers, including a trade deal he had with the French forces at the fortress of Louisbourg before it fell.

Bradstreet also felt he was mistreated and not rewarded enough for his military prowess.

TheDictionary of Canadian Biography online notes that Bradstreet may have provided the basis for the British attack on Louisbourg and he provided a plan to his superiors on how to defeat the French in North America.

The latter plan, the website says, "offered a strategy which bears a striking resemblance" to the plan the British used to conquer Canada.

