---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20080924/"
title: "__Whig20080924"

---

##Studying the life of the lakeBy BRIAN JOHNSON


<blockquote><p>
The business of transportation by vessel on the Great Lakes began upon Lake Ontario. This lake, smallest in water area of all of the five Great Lakes, can boast of armed schooners and brigs as early as the French and Indian War.

- Dana T. Bowen, Shipwrecks of the Lakes, 1952</p></blockquote>

Here's a question:how long would it take to walk around Lake Ontario? And turn over a few rocks both on land and in the water while you're at it? And why would anyone want to?

Well, if you have lived along the rocky shoreline of Lake Ontario for the past couple of years, you might have noticed a young blond-haired

man with a close-cropped beard bent low with his pants rolled up to his knees and staring intently at the waterline in front of your cottage.

Is he digging for clams? Hardly.

It's a long way from the southern U. S. state of Texas to the shores of Lake Ontario, but to nautical archeologist Ben Ford, a PhD candidate at Texas A&M University, the Great Lake way up north bordering the two countries held a special interest.

"Lake Ontario is the smallest of the Great Lakes, but it is still a Great Lake," says Ford, "and with 726 miles of shoreline, surveying its entire edge would take a lifetime. I decided to focus my energies on eight onekilometre-square areas along the lakeshore."

But why study Lake Ontario, as opposed to the larger, more populated upper lakes? Simply put, Lake Ontario's geological history held a fascination for Ford.

"Lake Ontario was really not more than a river before the glaciers," he said. "Then the water was much higher after the glaciers melted, up to the top of the Niagara Escarpment 5,000 years ago. Also, Lake Ontario can be treated as a single entity more so than the other lakes, as it is more sequestered."

Ford also studied anthropology at the University of Cincinnati, so the lake's human history was equally important to him. "This portion of Ontario was first settled by the French in 1673 with the establishment of Fort Frontenac at the present site of Kingston and hosted early settlement by United Empire Loyalists following the American Revolution," he said. "But, more important, many of the old settlements are largely unchanged since the 19th century. On the other side, Jefferson County, New York, has a long history of native American habitation. As a result of the underlying bedrock, Jefferson County also has more embayments and islands."

Ford explains that these unique features protect the shore and limit erosion, increasing the potential for archeological sites along the water's edge.

This past summer, Ford and his team completed their three-year study, titled The Lake Ontario Maritime Landscape Project. They began in 2006 while camping along the various shorelines of the lake, including the western end of Wolfe Island.

Ford's thesis combines human and geological history. "How did people use the shoreline and how has it changed over time?" he asks emphatically. "How did the First Nations use the shoreline differently from the French? How did the British differ from the French?"

The project began with a year of archival research on the lake shoreline, and then it was time to hit the trail.

"I took a trip around the lake for seven weeks during the summer of 2006," Ford said. "I came to appreciate warm KOA showers and the Wal-Mart tent that saw me through a tornado."

Equipped with a well-used 18-foot inflatable motorboat, the Ford team set out and explored the many bays and rocky shores of the lake. Also carried aboard was a complex global positioning system involving a Geometrics G-882 magnetometer side-scan sonar linked to two different computers.

"Nice toys that required constant attention to detail," said Ford. "Our sites included projectile points, lithic scatters, fish weirs and evidence of portage routes or canoe tips, as well as landing places, docks, wharves, shipyards, shipwrecks, mills, evidence of stone hooking and habitation sites of all periods."

While the team travelled through many ports of call, it was the eastern end of the lake - the Kingston end -that held its interest. Parrott's Bay along Bath road, for example, had evidence of an early United Empire Loyalist settlement: submerged fire pits found in the area. This begs the question regarding water levels since that period. In other places in the bay, recent Danforth anchors could be found, as well as other, more ancient anchors that looked like they could belong to a battleship from another era.

"It is a very slow process," Ford states, "gathering the little things together to form a bigger story."

Over on the U. S. side at Point Peninsula, the team discovered what may have been a forgotten blacksmith shop along the water's edge. In Barrett Bay, Wolfe Island, a clay pipe with an inscription of an anchor on it was discovered near the shore. Had its owner fallen overboard? Was the pipe clenched in its owner's teeth as he slipped overboard from Sam Hitchcock's early ferry to Kingston during a storm?

For Ford and his team of archeologists, the work is far from over. For those of us who live along this great lake, what can we expect to happen in, say, the next five or even 50 years? Can history and former human habitat predict the future of Lake Ontario? Will lake levels rise because of global warming and melting Arctic ice? Or is the lake following its normal trend since the last ice age?

"There is an old adage," Ford said, "that for every hour of field work you can expect to spend three to 10 hours in the laboratory or library. The survey area and the regional information will then be integrated into data from the entire lakeshore, including historical context and known archeological sites." Then, he added, "through this approach, I will hopefully be able to discuss Lake Ontario as a whole and still graduate before the professors start using me as a cautionary tale."

Stay tuned, for I'm sure that regardless of any findings based on scientific facts, legend or lore, the lake will provide her own answer, in her own good time.



<hr>

Brian Johnson is captain of the Wolfe Islander III and a former member of the Whig Standard's Community Editorial Board.

Article ID# 1214243

