---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20070525/"
title: "__Whig20070525"

---

<strong>Tourism industry, business would benefit from better dock</strong>
Letters to the Editor - Friday, May 25, 2007 Updated @ 7:00:07 AM

The article, "Marine museum work could cost millions," published in the Whig Standard on May 20, is just a touch misleading. Although the museum has more than just a tangential interest in the condition of the docks, by far the greater cost, quoted in the millions, is related to the visiting ship dock at the bottom of Lower Union Street and the needs of the city.

When the acting associate deputy minister, Tim McGrath, wrote that the federal government had spent $1 million on remediation, he was in fact referring to the removal of contaminants from the dry dock so that particular piece of the property would be in a fit state to be acquired by the city.

Our city officials were very much on the ball about the dock being cleaned up. And, yes, there are plans to preserve the museum ship Alexander Henry in the dry dock, but before that could happen, the city concerns had to be met first.

Some years ago, while attending an international conference in Windsor, a Toronto port official, in typical gruff manner, approached me and the Marine Museum chairman. "Why don't you people in Kingston clean up your passenger ship dock?" We had puzzled looks on our faces, so he then went on to tell us that the cruise ship industry is looking for a first-class place to stop between Montreal and Toronto. Strategically, Kingston, with its mature tourism infrastructure, good shopping, drinking and eating, is exactly in the right place for this well-heeled market. The same dock at the bottom of Lower Union Street, fixed up, would allow naval vessels and other visiting ships, such as <a href="http://k7waterfront.org/KingstonWaterfrontNews042007.html#3394">HMCS Halifax</a>, direct access to the core of the city and just as important, people access to the ships.

And, yes, the Marine Museum would benefit from improvements to the docks, but by far the prime beneficiary would be the tourism industry and businesses in our city. In the meantime, with the clock ticking, the museum is caught between the negotiations over the property.

Maurice D. Smith
Barriefield

