---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20080821/"
title: "__Whig20080821"

---

##LETTERS### Discovery of historic wreck is a significant find



What a glorious discovery has been made of the remains of HMS Montreal ("New shipwreck discoveries hearken back to War of 1812," Aug. 19). This 22-gun sloop was launched from the Kingston naval dockyard (now home to Royal Military College) in April 1813. Initially named after the captain general and governor-in-chief of British North America, Sir George Prevost, it was quickly renamed HMS Wolfe and became post ship for the newly arrived commander of the Lake Ontario naval squadron, Commodore Sir James Lucas Yeo. It was crewed by some 130 ratings.

The Wolfe played a key role on Lake Ontario throughout 1813. It was Yeo's flagship during the raid on Sacket's Harbor in May 1813 and fought in the four actions between the British and American squadrons during August and September 1814.

Perhaps the most famous of these encounters was the "Burlington Races" of Sept. 28, 1813, in which the Wolfe lost its mizen topmast to American fire and was only saved from destruction through a bold move by Commander William Mulcaster on the Royal George, who placed his ship between the Wolfe and the American flagship, allowing Yeo to race away from the danger. For the next three hours, the American squadron chased the British, who found refuge in Burlington Bay. Within a day, the Wolfe was restored to fighting trim and Yeo was back on the lake.

When the naval establishment on the Great Lakes was removed from the quartermaster-general's department and became an independent command on April 1, 1814, many of the Kingston-based ships were renamed to conform to admiralty practice. Thus, the Wolfe became known as HMS Montreal and was rerated as a six rate ship with 21 guns, while Yeo's flag was moved to his new flagship, HMS Prince Regent, with 56 guns.

During 1814, HMS Montreal participated in the raid on Oswego and other squadron operations, such as supporting the army in the Niagara area. At Oswego, HMS Montreal moved to within 1,000 yards of shore to bombard an American battery.

Once it became clear that the war was over, the Montreal was laid up in 1817 and finally sold as a hulk in the 1830s, after which it was scuttled.

The discovery of the remains of HMS Montreal is a significant find, particularly given the importance of this ship and its history. It is even more fitting that this discovery was made before the coming 200th anniversary of the War of 1812.

As officials from Parks Canada noted, one hopes this discovery will be respected and that there will be no souvenir-hunting.

John R. Grodzinski Kingston

