---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20090224/"
title: "__Whig20090224"

---

##City floats marina idea###WAVE OF THE FUTURE?

By JORDAN PRESS,

<div class="sidebar">

###Marina project

What's being recommended for the two city-owned marinas, with estimated price tag in parentheses

###= Confederation Basin
* Reconstruct overnight transient docks, add 97 slips and reconfigure existing 353 slips to be 30, 40 or 50 feet long ($3.8 million).
* Construct a new 4,500-square-foot boater services and administration building with showers, laundry and washrooms on the water at southeast corner of Radisson Hotel ($1.35 million).
* Pedestrian walkway for general public to Shoal Tower and existing breakwater ($250,000).
* Construct 200 new slips at eastern edge of Block D, replace existing 88 docks on western side of Radisson Hotel and build new boater services building on Block D ($5.1 million).

###=Portsmouth Olympic Harbour
* Upgrade existing 286 slips and enlarge them to either 30 or 40 feet in length with 50- amp outlets ($5.1 million).
* Install electronic-controlled gates on all docks to restrict access ($100,000).
* Renovate entire site, including vehicle access point, landscaping, parking and outdoor winter storage area ($1.55 million).
</div>

Larger boating slips, more docks and revamping an aging marina could cost almost $20 million over the next five years.

While most of the money would be spent for the benefit of boaters living in or visiting Kingston, there would also be spending for the city's landlubbers: a walkway out onto the water downtown, giving access to an area where only boaters are currently allowed to go.

The recommendations and the $18.1-million price tag for work is contained in a report going before a city committee this week that could be the first step in altering the view from the shoreline downtown and at Portsmouth Olympic Harbour.

Repaying that spending could take between 13 and 25 years, the consultant says, depending on the operating surpluses the two marinas generate. Those surpluses, estimated between $700,000 and $1.4 million per year, are dependent on "how aggressively the marinas are promoted and operated," the report says.

The consultant says there could also be economic spinoff locally of more than $7 million and $4 million in tax revenues if the city makes the investment.

If the work proceeds, it would take place outside of the boating season, which starts in May and ends in late October.

"I don't see any interruption, particularly at Confederation Basin," said Ed Leeman, who oversees the marinas for the city.

"At Portsmouth Olympic Harbour, we may be looking at a total redesign. It's a little tired. It's 34 years old ... what we're looking at is a major facelift."

The facelift downtown could include a new walkway out onto the water. The consultant made the recommendation because, for non-boaters, Confederation Basin is "a barrier to full use of the ... waterfront."

The 2004 Downtown Action Plan recommended that a boardwalk be built on the breakwater at Confederation Basin to improve public access to the waterfront, and to relocate the floating docks to Block D "to eliminate the visual clutter around the Shoal Tower."

Homestead Land Holdings added sewage and electricity services to the east side of its development to allow for a future marina expansion. So far, the city has not done detailed planning to add slips to Block D.

"This would be the first proposal," Leeman said of the consultant's report.

The proposals require political approval this week. If the committee votes in favour of the preliminary plans, city staff would start on detailed designs that would go back to the committee by the end of the year.

Of the six marinas in Kingston and the immediate vicinity, only two are publicly owned: Flora MacDonald Confederation Basin and Portsmouth Olympic Harbour.

They also happen to be the two largest marinas in Kingston. The two operations will require a taxpayer subsidy of $320,000 this year, according to a city staff report.

The city looked at selling the marinas in 2006 after a tough 2005 season. City hall received five proposals from potential private operators, but decided instead to continue operating the two facilities.

The city doesn't actually own the marinas. The city leases the water lots from the federal government at a cost each year of roughly $200,000, or 20% of the gross revenues from the two operations.

The lease is set to expire this year and the city is stalled in talks with the federal government to purchase each site for $1.

Leeman said the sticking point at Confederation Basin is figuring out how Parks Canada and the city will work out ownership and maintenance around Shoal Tower. At Portsmouth Olympic Harbour, the issue is infrastructure work, Leeman said, adding the federal government has shown interest in helping with repairs.

The repairs that are being called for at both marinas would take years to complete, the consultant notes.

The consultant recommends increasing the number of boat slips at Confederation Basin to 450 from 353, and maintaining the 286 at Portsmouth Olympic Harbour.

However, the design of those slips could change. The consultant recommends the lengths of the slips downtown be either 30, 40 or 50 feet, a change from the nearly 140 slips that are less than 20 feet.

At Portsmouth Olympic Harbour, 30-and 40- foot-long slips are being recommended. Currently, more than half the slips at the site are 25 feet and under.

The two marinas can only accommodate up to six large transient boaters at a time, Leeman said.

Those long boats also tend to stay on the waiting list for a slip longer than other boats, he said, sometimes up to seven years.

"We seem to be able to accommodate most of our waiting list, except boats in excess of 40 feet," Leeman said.

Those large boats also require more power to run. The report recommends improving the amount of electricity the docks can supply to 50 amps.

Leeman said the city has tried to upgrade the power outlets at the marinas, but the current infrastructure cannot handle more high-amp outlets.

The arts, recreation and community policies committee will meet Thursday at 6 p. m. in the press lounge at Portsmouth Olympic Harbour. The full consultant's report is [[www.cityofkingston.ca/pdf/cityhall/committees /community/agenda/2009/ARC_A0309-SchedB.pdf available online]].


Article ID# 1448288

