---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/__Whig20100304/"
title: "__Whig20100304"

---

##Residents critical of new bridge proposal
By PAUL SCHLIESMANN



A bridge over the Cataraqui River will cost Kingstonians between $114 million and $181 million, depending on the number of traffic lanes.

The cost estimates were revealed at last night's meeting in Pittsburgh district during the presentation of the environment

al assessment report for the third crossing.

About 75 people turned out to hear staff from the J.L. Richards engineering firm present their report before opening the floor to questions.

The $114 million is the estimate for a two-lane bridge crossing from John Counter Boulevard on the west bank to Gore Road on the east.

A two-lane bridge that could be expanded later to four lanes was pegged at $139 million.

The cost of building a four-lane bridge would be about $181 million.

But the price tag was barely an issue as a number of people, mostly Pittsburgh residents, stepped up to the microphones to question whether a new bridge was needed at all.

Several times, members of the audience broke into applause when the bridge concept was criticized.

The study indicates the [[LaSalle Causeway]] is seeing an estimated eastbound volume of about 1,300 vehicles an hour -- 509 vehicles an hour over its capacity.

The transportation master plan of 2004 forecasted a deficiency of 830 vehicles an hour by 2026.

"I don't buy it, actually," said one woman who noted that the only slow times she experiences are during rush hours. "It seems that what's driving this proposal is the increased volume of cars."

She suggested car pooling and expanded bus service as ways to avoid building a bridge.

One resident of the Point St. Mark subdivision expressed concerns about the bridge landing in his neighbourhood.

While the preferred option would see the bridge joining Hwy. 15 at a T-intersection, the next-preferred option has the bridge access curving to the north of the Pittsburgh library property.

Moving the entrance north would also raise the price of a two-lane bridge by $37 million.

The recommendation to pro-c eed with an environmental study report will go before city councillors on April 20.



Article ID# 2475950

