---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/_Whig2006-11-18/"
title: "_Whig2006-11-18"

---

<h3>Flooding rankles residents</h3>

Jordan Press
Local News - Saturday, November 18, 2006 Updated @ 12:30:22 AM

Blanca Vides-Alfaro walked downstairs and noticed there was water everywhere.

Her parents rushed down and the three tried to save as many items as they could pictures, photo albums, memories.

It was flashback from a 2004 storm that left everything in their basement swimming in sewage. On Thursday, the water rose above the toilet seat and again sewage filled the basement as water gushed from the drains.

In the end, the family lost furniture, its furnace, hot-water tank, DVD player, television, cameras, and washer and dryer.

This is the second time this happened, said Ademir Vides-Alfaro, 19. The first time we lost some stuff, but it wasnt as much as this time and the water wasnt that high as well.

And yesterday they got news that they dont have insurance coverage, Vides-Alfaro said.

Rain flooded basements in the city Thursday, two years after residents felt they were safe from water and sewage running into their homes.

In September 2004, nearly 120 millimetres of rain drenched Kingston and caused flooding in businesses and homes. The city waived tipping fees for residents affected by flooding, but Kingstonians had to haul the items from their homes. Councillors were concerned about the cost of the service, estimated to be about $100,000.


Councillor Steve Garrison said if residents had major damage to their homes from overflowing drains, he would ask council and staff to do whatever they can to help.

That may include picking up large items from homes, he said.

I think council made a very poor choice two years ago, said Garrison, who said his home got a little water damage Thursday. I would hope they would have learned lessons from 2004.

After the 2004 floods, many residents spent thousands of dollars to upgrade their homes. Halina Gnyra and her husband, Dan, spent about $10,000. Around 9 p.m. Thursday, the elderly couple noticed water coming into the basement of their Indian Road home.

Its a disaster for us, she said. Her losses arent as bad as 2004. Gnyra, 78, said she doesnt keep as many things in the basement as before.

Alison Bonham and her husband, Andrew, are still rebuilding their basement after the 2004 flood destroyed much of it. They also bought a pump.

If we hadnt had the pump, it would have been the same as two years ago, Alison Bonham said. There was a current. It was coming up [through the drain] fast exactly the same as two years ago.

She said the flooding has probably caused a couple of thousand dollars worth of damage.

The basement apartment in Steven Siscos home was also flooded again. About four inches of water filled the basement as it came out of the bathtub, Siscos said.

It was sewage coming from the toilet and tub, he said. Its not the greatest smell youd like to have.

Two years ago, Siscos was able to pump some of the sewage out.

The type of damage two years ago was minimal, he said. It did happen but it didnt happen as badly as this time. I think theres a bit of an issue there. Enoughs enough. Fix the sewer system.

Utilities Kingston dumped an estimated 50 million litres (50,000 cubic metres) of sewage into the Cataraqui River and Lake Ontario Thursday to prevent more backups in the system.

Utilities Kingston bypassed 14 million litres (14,000 cubic metres) at the Collingwood station and 15 million litres (15,000 cubic metres) at the north end station. The OKill water-treatment plant was bypassed for 25 hours, Jim Keech, president of Utilities Kingston, said.

There was also the unusual step of bypassing secondary treatment at the west-end sewage plant for 15 hours, Keech said. The plant removed large solids from waste water but didnt purify it, Keech said.

On Thursday, about 35 mm of rain fell. With the added water from Wednesday night, the total for the two days was about 43 mm. Since Nov. 11, the city has seen 80 mm of rain that has seeped its way into sewers.

The prolonged rainfall didnt give the citys sewer system time to get back to normal, Keech said.

When Kingston gets a heavy rainfall, the city releases untreated waste water into the river to prevent the antiquated sewer system from backing up, a common practice with older sewer systems.

In Kingston, about one billion litres of untreated wastewater has been released into the Cataraqui River and Lake Ontario over the last seven years.

Over the last five years, the city has spent more than $50 million on control measures, including combined sewer overflow control tanks, which held water from combined sewers long enough for the backlog to end.

Keech said the new overflow tank at the River Street station prevented any bypasses at that location, as would have happened in the past. Upgrades in capacity are being made at the north-end station, Keech said.

