---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/_Whig2006-11-17/"
title: "_Whig2006-11-17"

---

<h3>City dumps sewage in waterways</h3>

Jordan Press
Local News - Friday, November 17, 2006 Updated @ 12:21:41 AM

Heavy rainfall yesterday caused the overflow of sewage into waterways.

The long, sustained drenching Kingston has taken over the last two days exceeded capacity at three overflow tanks and pushed close to capacity at a fourth.

The north-end pumping station was the first to be bypassed. Tanks at Collingwood and OKill streets were bypassed next, Utilities Kingston president Jim Keech said.

I cant really quantify that right now, but weve probably been bypassing for more than an hour and a half, he said yesterday afternoon.

It is sewage that has been bypassed. Its not good. Its a situation were concerned about and were trying to remedy.

When Kingston gets a heavy rainfall, the citys antiquated sewer system can become backed up, which can lead to sewage in the basements of homes and businesses.

The city has to release untreated waste water into the river to prevent it from doing so. Its a practice common in municipalities with old sewer systems.

In Kingston, the longstanding practice has spewed about one billion litres of untreated wastewater into the Cataraqui River and Lake Ontario over the last seven years.


For five of those years, the city has spent more than $50 million on control measures that included combined sewer overflow control tanks, which held water from sewers long enough for the backlog to come to an end.

Keech said the amount spilled into the river and lake yesterday wouldnt be known until today.

New monitoring systems and overflow tanks delayed bypasses until the early afternoon, Keech said.

Its been a significant help, he said. Had we been in a rain like this years ago, wed have probably been bypassing early this morning.

The north-end pumping station takes in a trunk sewer that covers a portion of the old city, Keech said.

Utilities Kingston is increasing capacity at that station because there have been bypasses there before, he said.

Environment Canada issued a rainfall warning yesterday afternoon for the Kingston area.

A low pressure system over Lake Erie brought a lot of rain with it. About 30 millimetres was dumped on the area by yesterday afternoon and that number was expected to double going into last night when rainfall was expected to taper off.

The Cataraqui Region Conservation Authority issued a flood advisory for residents in low-lying areas along creeks and rivers.

Most of the low-lying areas are areas of low elevation and right next to a creek and those are the ones were concerned about, said general manager Steve Knechtel.

Its just kind of a heads-up to remind them these areas are likely to be under water again.

It also warned people to be careful around streams, ditches, detention basins and other locations where rainfall may pond.

Most is ponding in fields and ditches and streams, Knechtel said.

Flooding would last about 24 hours on smaller stream systems, days on larger ones, he said.

Residents in the area of Portsmouth Avenue and John Counter Boulevard were reporting some sewer back-up last night.

My home isnt too bad. I do have water coming in under the foundation but its on a bit of a slant so its running into my pump but of course some is soaking up into the walls, said Portsmouth resident Lori Pantrey.

My bathtub has backed up and it was almost full of sewer water so now when I go to the washroom I cant even flush the toilet because it will back up into my bathtub.

Pantrey said she was not the only one suffering from the excessive rain.

The home next door has also been affected.

Luckily enough, they have three or four pumps going and great, big, long almost like fire hoses are running the water out down the lane of his house, Pantrey said.

The next homeowners were not so lucky. They have about two feet of water in their basement and everything is ruined.

Across the street from Pantreys home is a sewer grate but, water was not draining there, she said. It was doing quite the opposite.

Instead of the water running down into the grate, its coming up like a fountain and its a big round metal one so if too much pressure builds up it could blow that metal plate right off the road.

Environment Canadas forecast for today showed a 60-per-cent chance of rain.

with files from David Lea

jpress@thewhig.com
