---
layout: topic
permalink: "/topic/_CORKOffshoreMarketing/"
title: "_CORKOffshoreMarketing"

---

Olson fleet

<img src="/files/racing/olson fleet/clip_image002.gif">

I found, cleaned, and sorted some more [Olson data][_olsonfleetlist].  -- [Steven Black][stevenblack]

Thanks for the up date Steve!

any thoughts or ideas maybe freely entered here. Treat it as a giant white board (bruce)

Committee members

Brian Thomson

Bruce Rand

John Trueman

Kristine Davis

John Muir

The Wilby's

Dave Black

add your name here.....

----


Hi Everyone:



I am considering creating a Great Lakes Regional Website for Olson 30 owners racing on the Great Lakes. The purpose of the site would be to encourage communication amongst owners and growth of the Great Lakes Fleet. In addition, I would like to start an Olson 30 Great Lakes Regatta which would be held annually at various venues across the region. I propose that the 2006 regatta be held in Kingston, Ontario as part of the CORK event which is held in mid August. We now have three boats actively racing in Kingston and I'm confident that we can get at least three more making the inaugural event a respectable fleet of six or more.



The website address will be: www.pridemarine.com/Olson30GreatLakesFleet.htm



Please respond with your feedback and let me know if you'd like your boat information listed on the site?



Cheers, Dave.

----


Other issues and sollutions

What role do you expect this committee to take on and with what authority?

Are we responsible for shore side entertainment/social aspect? If not, are we nothing more than cheerleaders without power to change things?

Where, how much, and who determines funding available to do the above?  Do we have a say in registration costs? Will money come out of "current registration fee"?

What limitations, if any, do we face in Portsmouth Harbour re available space, conflicting commercial interests/sponsors with Portsmouth tenants? Do we have right to put up tents? Can we bring in outside vendors for catering/food/entertainment?  If so what are conditions?  Where?  Can we make use of interior space if weather does not cooperate?  Do we have ability to set aside area for suitable rafting?

What is extent of Portsmouth liability for crane operation? For Larger boats (crane brought in)?  For smaller boats (existing hoist on site)?  Who will operate small hoist?
If a large crane is brought in can it be left on site for the week if needed?  Will larger boats have to pay additional fee for registration to use large crane?  If needed can we ensure that fee for large crane is "fixed" i.e. cost known in advance rather than based upon number of boats ultimately using the crane?  Will anybody come if we have open ended liability to cover cost of the crane?

I think we will be able to tell relatively quickly, if CORK is serious about effecting change to fix the regatta or not.  If we get quick positive responses to most of our questions we will be able to go forward.

----




Are there any comments forthcoming from the meeting with Tim Irwin a while back?
----
<font color='purple'>Tims response to meeting below

 Subject: CORK Offshore
 Date: Thu, 10 Nov 2005 14:50:41 -0500
Brian and Kristine,
    Thanks for getting the ball rolling on CORK Offshore and for
coming to Kingston to meet with me last evening. I describe below
 where I think we got to in out discussions. Let me know if you agree
 (or
 not) and I will pass a final version by our board.

>   1.. Brian will be Offshore Coordinator. (This is the position that
> Ken Morgan held for the last three or four years. He resigned last
> year and I carried on as best I could with a lot of help from Ila and
> a few others.) The tasks that go along with this
> include:
>     a.. Promote, promote, promote. -- CORK will reimburse for out of
> pocket expenses. (Significant expenses require prior approval.) -- I
> think we all agree that the revival of CORK offshore will require a
> lot of promotion. Toward that end, If your in agreement with all this,
> I'll pass along the names and addresses (e-mail and otherwise) of PHRF
> and
> Laser28 competitors from past years.
>     b.. Seek out sponsorship in conjunction with Bob Pritchard.
>     c.. Determine the format of the event.
>       a.. Long (middle) distance race or no LD race.
>       b.. Length of long distance race (middle, long, very long) --
> Tyler Bjorn is keen to have a few very long races.
>       c.. Number of races per day.
>       d.. How many boats are needed to make up a group that will race
> level? How close should the handicaps be?
>       e.. Score under more than one handicap system.
>       f.. etc.
>     d.. Participate in the preparation and distribution of the NoR and
> SIs.
>     e.. Awards - Select and Procure awards for 'PHRF' and arrange for
> ceremony for PHRF and J22s and J24s. etc. (The awards for 22s and 24s
> will be the same format as for other CORK events.
>     f.. Social - Design and implement a social program to include
> J-22s on Fri. & Sat. and J-24s on Sat
>     g.. Attend board meetings as needed.
>     h.. Prepare a mooring plan.
>     i.. Prepare a budget. - including fees, number of competitors etc.
> etc. etc.
>   2.. Brian is also chairman of the offshore committee which includes
> Kristine Davis, Bruce Rand and John Muir.
>   3.. CORK will undertake to run Offshore for at least one more year
> and will underwrite any losses (and hopefully enjoy any contributions
> to overhead.)
>

----

 <font color='red'>I was unable to attend the meeting. Brian T should comment."B Rand"

{% include routes.html %}
